The effect of tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy on 
inattention and impulsivity as measured by the Test of 
Variables of Attention (TOVA) in children with obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome 

GALIT AVIOR, MD, GADI FISHMAN, MD, AGNES LEOR, MD, YAKOV SIVAN, MD, NEHEMIA KAYSAR, MD, and ARI DEROWE, MD, Tel 
Aviv, Israel 

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate children with obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) for features of attention 
deficit disorder (ADD) using an objective test of 
inattention and impulsivity: Test of Variables of Attention 
(TOVA) and then to determine whether tonsillectomy 
and adenoidectomy (TA) results in an 
improvement in TOVA scores. 
STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: This study was a prospective 
interventional comparative trial in a tertiary 
care children’s hospital. Nineteen children 
ages 5 to 14 years with OSAS, and otherwise 
healthy, with a clinical indication for TA. Preoperative 
and 2 months postoperative OSA-18, CBCL 
questionnaires, and TOVA scores were evaluated. 
RESULTS: The preoperative TOVA scores were in the 
abnormal range in 12/19 (63%) of the children. The 
mean preoperative TOVA score was 2.9 (. 
3.1). 
The mean postoperative TOVA score was 0.4 
(2.8). The improvement in the TOVA scores was 
significant (P < 0.0001, t-test). 
CONCLUSION: This preliminary data suggests that 
treatment of OSAS with TA results in significant 
improvement in objective parameters of inattention 
and impulsivity. 
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings may be important in 
understanding the impact of OSAS and therapeutic 
interventions on behavioral problems in children. 

(Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004;131:367-71.) 

From the Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery (Dr 
Avior), Pediatric Otolaryngology Unit (Drs Fishman and DeRowe), 
Pediatric Psychiatry Unit (Drs Leor and Kaysar), and Pediatric Center for 
Sleep Disorders (Dr Sivan), “Dana” Children’s Hospital, Tel-Aviv 
Sourasky Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 

Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology, 
Nashville, TN, May 4, 2003. 

Reprint requests: Ari DeRowe, MD, Pediatric Otolaryngology Unit, “Dana” 
Children’s Hospital, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, 6 Weitzman St., Tel-Aviv, 
64239, Israel; e-mail, aderowe@post.tau.ac.il 

0194-5998/$30.00 

Copyright © 2004 by the American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and 
Neck Surgery Foundation, Inc. 

doi:10.1016/j.otohns.2004.04.015 

Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is a relatively common 
condition in otherwise healthy children. It includes 
a continuum of pathologies, with obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA) considered to be the more severe form. The 
prevalence of OSA is estimated to be 1% to 2% of all 
children.1 The underlying pathophysiology of OSA in 
children is thought to be a dynamic process caused by 
upper airway narrowing and abnormal upper airway 
neuromotor tone resulting in airway collapse during 
sleep. OSA in children is predominately associated 
with adenotonsillar hypertrophy, but can also be associated 
with other upper airway pathology such as a 
small mouth or pharynx, decreased upper airway tone, 
craniofacial anomaly, or morbid obesity.1,2 

The nighttime symptoms of OSA include snoring, 
breathing cessation, choking, gasping, struggling to 
breathe, restless sleep, and frequent awakenings. Although 
daytime sleepiness may be present, it is not a 
common symptom in children as compared with adults.1 
Daytime symptoms that are more frequently associated 
with OSA in children include learning difficulties, attention 
disorders, hyperactivity, aggression, and antisocial 
behavior.1-5 When OSA is not recognized and is left 
untreated, significant morbidity such as failure to thrive, 
systemic hypertension, and pulmonary hypertension with 
or without cor pulmonale can develop.1 Data is emerging 
regarding neurocognitive sequela. 

In the vast majority of children with OSA, surgical 
removal of hypertrophic tonsillar and adenoid tissue 
will usually result in complete resolution of OSA.1 By 
using standardized behavioral assessments, recent reports 
support the association between behavioral and 
attention problems in children with sleep-disordered 
breathing.3-7 

The Test of Variables of Attention (TOVA) has been 
used as objective measures to assist in the diagnosis of 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD).8,9 
TOVA is a 23-minute visual continuous performance 
test with minimal language demands, no left-right discrimination, 
and has a proven test-retest validity.8-11 
The test is done in the form of a computer game 
allowing for excellent cooperation by the child. In this 
study, TOVA was used to evaluate attention and con



368 AVIOR et al 

centration in children with OSAS before and after tonsillectomy 
and adenoidectomy (TA). 

The OSA-18 is an 18-item health-related quality of 
life survey of pediatric OSAS that has been correlated 
with the respiratory disturbance index on nap polysomnography. 
It has been shown to have a high level of 
reliability, validity, and responsiveness.12,13 

The Achenbach Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL)/ 
4-8 attention problems syndrome scales is an 11-item 
standardized parent report questionnaire designed to 
evaluate behavioral problems in children between the 
age of 4 and 18. The CBCL has a high validity for 
detecting attention problems and is widely used in 
comparative studies.14,15 

The purpose of this study was to determine the impact 
of TA on attention in children with OSA using TOVA 
as an objective tool. To our knowledge, no prior study has 
used an objective measure of ADHD for the evaluation of 
children with OSAS before or after treatment. 

PATIENTS AND METHODS 

In a prospective cohort interventional outcomes 
study, children ages 5 to 14 years presenting to the 
Pediatric Otolaryngology Outpatient Clinic in our institution 
between April 2002 and March 2003 who were 
scheduled for tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (TA) 
for upper airway obstruction were included. The indication 
for TA was a more than 3-month history 
consistent with OSA as measured by parental observation 
of continuous loud snoring with occasional cessation 
of breathing or respiratory effort during sleep and 
a physical examination that demonstrated adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy. Tonsillar hypertrophy was considered 
when tonsil size was 3. 
and above on a scale of 1 to 
4. Adenoid size was assessed by fiberoptic endoscopy 
or lateral neck x-ray and hypertrophy considered when 
3. 
or above. 

Exclusion criteria included airway obstruction that 
was not only due to adenotonsillar hypertrophy, such as 
craniofacial anomalies, neurological impairment or 
when TA was contraindicated. Children with a prior 
diagnosis or suspicion of ADHD were also excluded. 

Prior to surgery and 2 months postoperatively all 
children were administered TOVA. The children’s parents 
completed 2 questionnaires: the OSA-18 and attention 
CBCL/4-18. The children also had a clinical 
and physical evaluation by a pediatric otolaryngologist 
before surgery and 2 months postoperatively. 

A detailed description of TOVA is beyond the scope 
of this paper.8-11 In brief, TOVA is a 23-minute fixed-
interval visual continuous performance test with minimal 
language demands and no left-right discrimination. 
It is similar to a computer game. The child observes the 
monitor as targets are presented. When he/she sees a 

Otolaryngology– 
Head and Neck Surgery 

October 2004 

target he/she presses on a microswitch. Targets and 
nontargets are randomly presented and the child must 
differentiate between them and press the switch only 
for targets. Every 2 seconds, a stimulus will flash on the 
screen and the subject then responds to the targets and 
not to the nontargets. In such a manner, TOVA evaluates 
omission and commission errors, response times, 
and anticipatory responses. Errors of omission are indicators 
of inattention. Errors of commission are indicators 
of impulsivity. These errors, response times, and 
other variables are all recorded for each 5-minute quarter 
and 10-minute halves, as well as overall total scores 
for each variable. Scores are then compared to standardized 
norms and an interpretation of the data is 
summarized in a printable report. The manual recommends 
that the diagnosis of attention deficit disorders 
be consider when there is a 1.5 standard deviation from 
the age-and sex-adjusted mean. 

The OSA-18 questionnaire consists of 18 survey 
items divided into 5 domains (sleep disturbance, physical 
symptoms, emotional symptoms, daytime functioning, 
and caregiver concerns). The items are scored on a 
scale of 1 to 7.12,13 

The CBCL/4-8 attention problems syndrome scales 
is an 11-item standardized parent report questionnaire 
designed to asses behavior problems in children between 
the age of 4 and 18.2 The CBCL has high validity 
for detecting attention problems and is widely used in 
comparative studies. Each item is scored as follows: 0, 
not true; 1, somewhat or sometimes true; and, 2, very 
true or often true. The total score can also be compared 
with the score of children in normative samples. 

Statistical Analysis 

The TOVA score of each child was compared before 
and after surgery using a matched 2-tailed t-test. The 
OSA-18 and the CBCL parental questionnaire scores 
were compared before and after surgery with a matched 
2-tailed t-test. A P-value . 
0.05 was considered significant. 


Permission was obtained from the institutional review 
board for human investigations in our hospital 
(Helsinki committee). Informed consent was obtained 
from all parents. 

RESULTS 

A total of 19 children (8 females and 11 males) 
completed preoperative and postoperative surveys. 
Mean patient age was 7.97 (range, 5-14). 

The OSA-18, CBCL, and TOVA preoperative and 
postoperative mean scores are presented in Table 1. 
There was a significant improvement in the OSA-18 
scores with a 46% reduction in scores postoperatively 
reflecting improvement of sleep-related quality of life 


Otolaryngology– 
Head and Neck Surgery 


Volume 131 Number 4 AVIOR et al 369 

Table 1. Preoperative and postoperative TOVA, OSA-18 and CBCL scores 

Preoperative Postoperative P value 
TOVA 2.9 (3.1) 0.4 (2.8) 0.0001 
OSA-18 66.2 (13.1) 30.4 (10.1) 0.0001 
CBCL 6.1 (4.7) 3.8 (2.1) 0.018 
P values using a matched 2-tailed t-test. Improvement was significant in all 3 parameters. 
Table 2. OSA-18 domains before and after surgery 
Preoperative Postoperative P value 
Sleep disturbance 20.1 (5) 5.9 (2.1) 0.0001 
Physical 17.5 (5.4) 8.1 (4.6) 0.0001 
symptoms 
Emotional distress 7.9 (4.8) 6.1 (4.3) 0.085 
Daytime function 8.3 (3.8) 5 (2.1) 0.002 
Caregiver concern 12. (3.6) 5 (2.5) 0.0001 

Significance was reached in all parameters except emotional distress. 

(P . 
0.0001). Sleep disturbance, physical symptoms, 
and caregiver concerns were the highest rated domains, 
followed by daytime function and emotional symptoms. 
The improvement in OSA-18 scores before and 
after surgery was significant for all domains except for 
emotional symptoms (Table 2). 

There was a significant change in the mean CBCL 
score, which showed a significant improvement from 

6.1 before to 3.8 after the operation (P . 
0.018). This 
indicates an improvement in attention related items of 
this questionnaire. 
All children with the exception of 1, showed significant 
improvement in their TOVA scores after TA. 
The mean improvement was from 2.9 preoperatively 
to 0.4 postoperatively (P . 
0.0001). 

Prior to surgery, 36% (7/19) of the children had 
TOVA scores within normal limits. These scores improved 
significantly after surgery. In addition, 42% 
(8/19) of the children had preoperative TOVA scores 
below normal limits that improved into the normal 
range following surgery. In 21% (4/19) of the children, 
TOVA scores remained below normal limits postoperatively. 
Nevertheless, an improvement was observed in 
all the children except 1 (Fig 1). 

DISCUSSION 

Our understanding of the relationship of SDB in 
children to learning and behavioral problems is incomplete. 
Recent studies have suggested an association 
between poor behavior and neurocognitive performance 
in children with SDB. These studies also 
showed that therapeutic surgical intervention resulted 
in significant improvements in school grades, or in 
standardized behavioral assessments.1,2,5-7,16 However, 

these studies examined the child’s behavior and neurocognitive 
performance on the basis of questionnaires, 
intelligence tests, and school grades. Using these methods, 
behavior rating is subjective and susceptible to 
certain biases. In this study, we used the TOVA, which 
is considered an objective tool used to measure attention 
in children and to aid in the diagnosis and treatment 
of ADHD.9-11 This study is the first, to our knowledge 
to use the TOVA to estimate attention problems in 
children suffering from OSAS. 

TOVA is widely accepted as an ancillary test for the 
diagnosis of children with ADHD over 5 years old. It is 
also used for monitoring medication effectiveness in 
these children. This test has proved to have test retest 
reliability; there is no learning effect on repeated administration 
of the test.10 

This study revealed an association between OSAS and 
attention problems in children. The TOVA scores prior to 
surgery in this cohort were pathological in 12/19 (63%) of 
the children, though they were not previously diagnosed 
with behavioral problems. This high percentage of pathological 
TOVA scores in this cohort is alarming especially 
considering that children that were suspected to have 
ADHD were excluded from the study. This result may be 
due to a sampling error in this small group of children. A 
large longitudinal study is needed to verify the magnitude 
of this result. Of importance was the significant improvement 
in the TOVA scores after surgery, paralleling improvement 
in their SDB as assessed by the OSA-18 questionnaire. 
This improvement in attention might have a 
great influence on the child’s daily behavior, quality of 
life, and school performance, as was demonstrated in 
other studies. 


370 AVIOR et al 


Fig 1. TOVA scores in 3 subgroups before and after surgery. 
Group 1 with normal preoperative and postoperative 
scores showing improvement. Group 2 with abnormal 
preoperative scores that improved to the normal 
range. Group 3 with abnormal preoperative and postoperative 
scores but still improved. TOVA scores in the whole 
group (n . 
19) showed improvement. Scores below the 
thick dotted line represent abnormal TOVA scores. 

Gozal3 demonstrated a significant change in school 
performance in children with SDB that underwent 
TA as compared to a control group of children with 
SDB that their parents elected not to seek therapeutic 
intervention. Bluden et al5 showed that compared with 
controls, children who snore have significantly impaired 
attention and, although within the normal range, 
lower memory and intelligence scores. Goldstein et al6 
demonstrated a high prevalence of abnormal behavior 
in children undergoing TA for chronic upper airway 
obstruction. Scores on a standardized measure of be


TA.4,6

havior questionnaire improved following 
Serres et al7 showed a large improvement in at least 
short-term quality of life in children with OSAS following 
treatment. 

The present population of children comprised of 3 
groups according to preoperative TOVA scores. One 
group had a score within the normal range but still 
showed an improvement in scores. The abnormal 
TOVA scores split into 2 groups, 1 with an improvement 
of scores to the normal range, the other improved 

Otolaryngology– 
Head and Neck Surgery 

October 2004 

but remained in the abnormal range. If children with 
behavioral problems are referred for treatment of SDB 
it should not be taken for granted that the behavioral 
problems will resolve in all cases. Possible explanation 
can found in earlier studies. Gozal and Pope17 found a 
correlation between children with lower academic performance 
in middle school and snoring in early childhood. 
They concluded that residual deficits in learning 
performance may still be detected even several years 
after snoring has resolved. O’Brien et al18 found an 
unusually high prevalence of snoring among children 
with mild symptoms of ADHD. However, in children 
with severe ADHD there was a similar prevalence of 
OSA as in the general pediatric population. Thus, the 
findings of these authors suggest that although OSA can 
cause mild behavioral effects it does not seem to mimic 
more severe ADHD symptoms.18 

The patient population in this study was small, but 
using each child as his/her own control, statistical analysis 
was possible and significance was reached. The 
improvements in objective measures coincided to the 
improvements in the subjective questionnaires. Even in 
this small group, significance was reached showing 
improvement in all children using behavioral subjective 
and objective parameters of ADHD. Using TOVA as an 
objective measure of ADHD-related behavior may 
prove to be an important tool in evaluating children 
with SDB. TA in children with OSA appears to have 
a positive effect on the child’s ability to pay attention. 

REFERENCES 

1. Marcus CL. Sleep-disordered breathing in children. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 2001;164:16-30. 
2. Anstead M. Pediatric sleep disorders: new developments and 
evolving understanding. Curr Opin Pulmon Med 2000;6:501-6. 
3. Gozal D. Sleep-disordered breathing and school performance in 
children. Pediatrics 1998;102:616-20. 
4. Goldstein NA, Post JC, Rosenfeld RM, et al. Impact of tonsillectomy 
and adenoidectomy on child behavior. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2000;126:494-8. 
5. Blunden S, Lushington K, Kennedy D, et al. Behavior and 
neurocognitive performance in children aged 5-10 years who 
snore compared to controls. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 
2000;22:554-68. 
6. Goldstein NA, Fatima M, Campbell TF, et al. Child behavior and 
quality of life before and after tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;128:770-5. 
7. Serres LM, Derkay C, Sie K, et al. Impact of adenotonsillectomy 
on quality of life in children with obstructive sleep disorders. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;128:489-96. 
8. Schatz AM, Ballantyne AO, Trauner DA. Sensitivity and specificity 
of a computerized test of attention in the diagnosis of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Assessment 2001; 
8:35765. 
9. Wada N, Yamashita Y, Matsuishi T, et al. The test of variables 
of attention (TOVA) is useful in the diagnosis of Japanese male 
children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Brain Dev 
2000;22:378-82. 
10. Greenberg LM, Wailman ID. Developmental normative data on 
the test of variables of attention. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 
1993;34:1019-30. 

Otolaryngology– 
Head and Neck Surgery 


Volume 131 Number 4 

11. Forbes GB. Clinical utility of the test of variables of attention 
(TOVA) in the diagnosis of attention -deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. 
J Clin Psychol 1998;54:461-76. 
12. Franco RA, Rosenfeld RM, Rao M. Quality of life for children 
with obstructive sleep apnea. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
2000;123:9-16. 
13. Sohn H, Rosenfeld RM. Evaluation of sleep disordered breathing 
in children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2003;128:344-52. 
14. Achenbach TM. Manuel for the Child Behavior Checklist/4-18 
and 1991 Profile. Burlington VT: University of Vermont, Department 
of Psychiatry; 1991. 
15. Zilber N, Auerbach J, Lemer J. Israeli norms for the Achenbach 
AVIOR et al 371 

Child Behavior Checklist: comparison of clinically referred and 
non-referred children. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci 1994;131:5-12. 

16. Hansen DE, Vandenberg B. Neuropsychological features and 
differential diagnosis of sleep apnea syndrome in children. J Clin 
Child Psychol 1997;26:304-10. 
17. Gozal D, Pope DW. Snoring during childhood and academic 
performance at ages thirteen to fourteen years. Pediatrics 
2001;107:1394-8. 
18. O’Brien LM, Holbrook CR, Mervis CB, et al. Sleep and neurobehavioral 
characteristics of 5-to 7-year-old children with 
parentally reported symptoms of attention deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. Pediatrics 2003;111:554-62. 

