Tolerance of Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During Polysomnography in 
Children 

Ronald D. Chervin, MD, MS1; Deborah L. Ruzicka, RN, PhD1; Judith L. Wiebelhaus, RPSGT, REEGT1; Garnett L. Hegeman III, RPSGT1; Deanna J. Marriott, MAS1; 
Carole L. Marcus, MBBCh2; Bruno J. Giordani, PhD3; Robert A. Weatherly, MD4; James E. Dillon, MD5 

1Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; 2Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Johns Hopkins 
Hospital, Baltimore, MD; 3Division of Neuropsychology, Departments of Psychology and Psychiatry; 4Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, 
Department of Otolaryngology; 5Department of Psychiatry, Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 

Objectives: To assess tolerance of esophageal pressure monitoring 
(EPM) among 5- to 13-year-old children during research polysomnography 
at study entry and again 1 year later. 
Design: Prospective, observational study. 
Setting: University-based sleep laboratory. 
Participants: Children scheduled for adenotonsillectomy or hernia repair. 
Interventions: None; all operations were performed for clinical indications 
only. 
Results: Forty-two of 336 families approached about the study declined 
to participate mainly to avoid EPM. The EPM was usually the main concern 
for the 47 adenotonsillectomy and 7 hernia-repair patients and families 
who did participate. Among 54 enrolled subjects, 51 allowed attempts 
at insertion of the esophageal catheter, and insertion was successful in all 
cases; 38 tolerated EPM for at least 2 hours; 33 maintained EPM for the 
entire night; and 36 had repeat EPM 1 year later for at least 2 hours. 
Reasons for EPM failure included crying at insertion, vomiting, pain, and 

inadvertent catheter removal during sleep. The children who tolerated 
EPM for at least 2 hours did not differ from other subjects based on age, 
sex, presence of a disruptive behavior disorder, anxiety, tonsil size, history 
of tonsillitis, or body mass index (all P > .05). 
Conclusions: The EPM was well tolerated in most school-aged volunteers, 
but many families did not volunteer, and some children were not 
able to endure EPM for at least 2 hours. Although better success might be 
achieved in clinical settings if EPM is medically indicated and not part of 
voluntary research, EPM is still likely to create significant concern, for children 
and parents, that must be weighed against anticipated benefits. 
Key Words: sleep apnea syndromes, sleep disorders, polysomnography, 
child, esophageal pressure monitoring 
Citation: Chervin RD; Ruzicka DL; Wiebelhaus JL et al. Tolerance of 
esophageal pressure monitoring during polysomnography in children. 
SLEEP 2003;26(8):1022-6. 

INTRODUCTION 

SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING (SDB) IS BELIEVED TO 
OCCUR IN 1% TO 3% OF CHILDREN,1-3 BUT THESE ESTIMATES 
HAVE NOT INCLUDED UPPER AIRWAY RESISTANCE SYNDROME 
(UARS). The UARS is a form of SDB in which increases in 
respiratory effort, in the absence of clear apneas and hypopneas, lead to 
arousals, daytime sleepiness, behavioral morbidity, or other health-related 
consequences.4,5 Children may be at particular risk for UARS as 
opposed to frank obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.6 However, children 
with UARS are likely underrecognized,6 in part because sleep laboratory 
techniques necessary to detect increased upper airway resistance and 
UARS are not widely used. 

Esophageal pressure monitoring (EPM) during polysomnography is 
the gold standard for detection of increasing upper airway resistance that 
leads to arousals.7 End-tidal or transcutaneous CO2 monitoring, or pulse 
oximetry, may reveal obstructive hypoventilation, but these methods 
miss many respiratory event–related arousals that are detected by EPM.8 
Nasal-pressure monitoring may facilitate the diagnosis of UARS, but 
few data exist on the use of this methodology in children, and available 
reports suggest that signals are often lost due to obstruction with secretions, 
displacement of cannulas, or mouth breathing.9,10 In addition, 
some concerns have been raised about increased nasal resistance due to 

Disclosure Statement 

No significant financial interest/other relationship to disclose. 

Submitted for publication June 2003 
Accepted for publication July 2003 

Address correspondence to: Ronald D. Chervin, MD, MS, Michael S. Aldrich 
Sleep Disorders Laboratory, University Hospital 8D8702, Box 0117, 1500 E. 
Medical Center Dr, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0117; Tel: 734-647-9064; Fax: 734647-
9065; E-mail: chervin@umich.edu 

cannulas that may be large relative to small nasal passages.11 As a result, 
some sleep specialists now monitor esophageal pressure routinely on 
children evaluated for SDB.12 In general, however, pediatric EPM 
remains uncommon, partly because clinicians consider the technique to 
be invasive, frightening for children, and potentially disruptive of normal 
sleep architecture.13 Many children studied by polysomnography for 
SDB have enlarged, inflamed tonsils, whereas others have hyperactivity 
or other disruptive behaviors14; any of these factors could further 
decrease the likelihood that EPM would be tolerated. In fact, few studies 
have investigated the feasibility of EPM during pediatric 
polysomnography. One retrospective study, which compared 10 children 
recorded with EPM to 10 matched patients recorded without EPM, 
found the technique to be successful, well-tolerated, and without substantial 
effect on sleep architecture.15 

To better understand the extent to which EPM is tolerated in children, 
we tracked the experience of children who participated in an ongoing 
research study designed to assess the outcome-based value of several 
different variables that can be recorded during pediatric polysomnography. 
We then used demographic and clinical data to explore what factors 
might determine success or failure with EPM. The diagnostic value of 
EPM, along with that of several other polysomnographic measures, will 
be addressed fully in a future manuscript. 

METHODS 

Subjects 

Children aged 5.0 through 12.9 years old were recruited from private 
and university-based pediatric otolaryngology and general surgery clinics 
in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Eight of the 9 otolaryngologists estimated 
to perform at least 90% of adenotonsillectomies (ATs) in Washtenaw 
County participated. To enroll in this study, children had to have been 
scheduled for AT (for SDB or other indications) or hernia repair (as a 
control). Children were excluded if they (1) required a polysomnogram 

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1022 Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During PSG in Children—Chervin et al 


for clinical purposes according to their physicians or surgeons, (2) had a 
history of treatment for SDB, or (3) had severe medical conditions that 
would preclude cognitive or polysomnographic assessment. Clinic 
clerks, nurses, or physicians briefly assessed participants’ potential interest 
in the study during clinic visits and faxed a referral form to the investigators, 
who then called identified parents, described the study, and 
extended an invitation to participate in a hands-on tour of the sleep laboratory 
for the child. 

During the tour, children were allowed to see, touch, and handle electrodes, 
wires, sensors, and EPM catheters that were placed in a tray and 
carefully presented without disproportionate emphasis. Photographs of 
staff with esophageal catheters in place, with and without the additional 
sensors and electrodes required for polysomnography, were available at 
the time of the tour so that parents and children could see the relative 
sizes of the devices and understand what to expect. Prior to enrollment, 
parents signed informed consent documents, and children who were able 
to understand the study gave written assent for this Institutional Review 
Board-approved study. Whenever possible, by phone or fax, investigators 
collected some baseline historical information about all the potential 
participants identified by the surgical clinics, including those children 
who did not eventually enroll. 

Procedures 

Several days to weeks before the scheduled surgical procedure, each 
child and parent arrived at the sleep laboratory for an evening evaluation 
with a child psychiatrist, followed by a nocturnal polysomnogram. The 
polysomnogram was conducted in a large private room with a cot for the 
parent. Each child and parent pair was encouraged to make the visit a 
special event. They were advised to bring videotapes, games, books, bed 
toys, pillows, and other key sleeping aids from home. Selected technical 
staff experienced in pediatric polysomnography performed the studies. 
Prior to the studies, children took any routine medications, but none used 
a hypnotic. Stimulants were discontinued 10 days prior to the recordings. 

Digital polysomnography included 4 electroencephalogram channels 
(C3-A2, C4-A1, O1-A2, O2-A1 of the 10-20 international electrode 
placement system), 2 electrooculogram recording sites (right and left 
outer canthi), chin and bilateral anterior tibialis electromyogram, 2 electrocardiogram 
tracings, nasal and oral airflow (thermocouples), thoracic 
and abdominal excursion (piezoelectric strain gauges), finger oximetry 
(with viewable but not recorded pulse waveform), end-tidal CO2, transcutaneous 
CO2, and EPM. The latter was performed with a water-filled 
catheter,16 according to methods that have been described in detail.12 
Hook-ups were performed in the subject’s sleep room with the child 
seated in an adjustable chair. All monitoring equipment, with the exception 
of the thermocouples, finger oximeter, and CO2 sensors, was applied 
prior to placement of the catheter. Children usually had a parent and an 
investigator in the room during the procedure, along with any stuffed 
animals, videos, toys, or other distractions brought from home. Viscous 
lidocaine was usually administered by a technician into 1 nostril and 
“inhaled” by the child. A pediatric nasogastric feeding tube (6 Fr) was 
inserted to a distance estimated to leave the tip several centimeters above 
the gastroesophageal sphincter. Insertion of the catheter was performed 
by registered polysomnographic technologists experienced with both 
children and this technique. When a child did not react well to insertion 
of the catheter, parents sometimes withdrew consent for continued 
attempts. When parents were supportive, technicians exercised some 
discretion in the determination of how many times to try the insertion, 
but visibly upset or crying children were not asked to continue with the 
procedure for more than 10 minutes. Arm restraints were not used to prevent 
catheter removal by the child during the night. 

During the day that followed polysomnography, a Multiple Sleep 
Latency Test and neuropsychological battery were administered. In the 
late afternoon, the child and parent were sent home with a $25 gift certificate 
to a toy store and a check for $100. Each child was scheduled to 
return for repeat postoperative testing under an identical protocol 
approximately 1 year after the surgical procedure. 

Outcome variables included success or 
failure of EPM, the length of time for which 
it was tolerated, and EPM problems recorded 
by technicians. Contacted families who 
declined participation in the research protocol 
were asked to provide the primary reason 
for their decision. Willingness to provide 
parental consent and subject assent to the 
same procedure 1 year later were also recorded. 
Explanatory variables included age, sex, 
tonsillectomy versus hernia repair, tonsil size 
(considered large if rated by an investigator 
as 3 or 4 on a 4-point scale), the psychiatrist’s 
DSM-IV-based diagnosis of a disruptive 
behavior disorder (attention-deficit hyperactivity 
disorder, conduct disorder, or oppositional-
defiant disorder), a widely used 
assessment for current anxious state (item 38 
on the Children’s Psychiatric Rating Scale17), 
socioeconomic status (Hollingshead, Yale 
Press, 1965), and body mass index 
(kg/(height in meters)2). 

Analysis 

Results were summarized as percentages 
or means and SD. Participants were compared 
to nonparticipants, and those who tolerated 
EPM for at least 2 hours to those who 
did not, by .2, Fisher’s exact, or t-tests. The 
2-hour demarcation was chosen because 
esophageal pressures are usually most negative 
during deep non-rapid eye movement 

Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During PSG in Children—Chervin et al 

Figure 1—Subject flow in research protocol that included esophageal pressure monitoring (EPM). 
SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1023 



sleep, which often occurs early in the night, and because the clinical 
experience of the investigators suggests that this is an approximate minimum 
duration that still allows useful inference based on EPM results. 
Analyses were performed with SAS, version 8.1 (SAS Institute Inc., 
Cary, NC). The level of significance was set at P < .05. 

RESULTS 

Subjects 

Among 200 AT patients approached about the study, 47 (23.5%) 
enrolled in the research protocol; among 136 herniorraphy patients 
approached, 7 (5.1%) enrolled. The mean age of the 54 enrolled participants, 
30 boys and 24 girls, was 8.43 ± 1.90 years; the range was 5.34 to 

12.81 years. Among children scheduled for AT, comparisons between 
participants and nonparticipants revealed no significant differences in 
frequency of recurrent tonsillitis, frequency of suspected sleep apnea, 
sex, socioeconomic status, habitual snoring, or history of behavioral 
complaints (P > .10 for each). However, on average, participants were 1 
year older than those who declined enrollment (P < .01). 
Esophageal Pressure Monitoring as a Barrier to Recruitment 

A total of 336 patients and their parents were approached by clinic 
staff about participation in this study, and 278 (82.7%) agreed to be 
called by an investigator, but 224 (80.6%) of these then declined to participate 
in the research (Figure 1). Among contacted families who 
declined participation, 42 (18.8%) described EPM as the single most 
important factor in their decision; this represents 29.6% of the 142 families 
who gave any specific reason. Other concerns cited by these families 
included the potential stress of the overnight stay just prior to 
surgery, the length of the study visits (two 24-hour periods spaced 1 year 
apart), and conflicts with job, family, and school activities. Parents’ aversion 
to EPM was often notable, and the majority of refusals to participate 
came from parents rather than children, usually at the time of the 
initial telephone contact by the research staff. Most families (96%) who 
toured the facility ultimately enrolled in the research protocol. Among 
parents and children who did enroll, virtually all expressed some concern 
about EPM, but they asked far more questions about sleep disorders 
than about EPM. 

Esophageal Pressure Monitoring 

Insertion of the esophageal catheter was attempted, as required by the 
protocol, for 51 (94.4%) of the 54 enrolled subjects. In 1 case, the technician 
did not attempt catheter insertion because of the patient’s persistent 
crying. Protocol exceptions were made to allow participation of 1 
child who had had multiple surgeries for a thyroductal cyst and 1 child 
whose parent refused any attempt at catheter insertion. 

Figure 2—Number of subjects, among 54 total, who tolerated esophageal pressure monitoring 
(EPM) for each indicated length of time. 
The catheter was inserted successfully in all 51 subjects, of whom 38 
(74.5%) tolerated and maintained it for at least 2 hours of recording, 35 
(68.6%) did so for at least 5 hours, and 33 (64.7%) did so for the entire 
preoperative polysomnogram. Figure 2 shows the duration of EPM for 
all 54 studied subjects. Comparison of children who tolerated EPM for 
at least 2 hours to those who did not showed no significant differences 
in age, sex, type of operation scheduled, presence of a disruptive behavior 
disorder, anxious state, tonsil size, history of recurrent tonsillitis, or 
body mass index (Table 1). However, the subjective impressions of an 
investigator who attended all catheter insertions (DLR) and the 
polysomnographic technicians who performed the procedure suggest 
that age and sex still may influence EPM tolerability in more subtle 
ways. For example, additional emotional support for younger children 
and girls appeared necessary to obtain a positive outcome. Many children 
reported that the viscous lidocaine was unpleasant because of mild 
nasopharyngeal irritation and a bad taste. In addition, the numbing sensation 
itself was alarming for some children with limited prior exposures 
to topical anesthetics. 

Among the 13 subjects who attempted but did not tolerate EPM for at 
least 2 hours during their baseline polysomnogram, reasons included 
crying for 10 or more minutes during catheter insertion (n = 9), vomiting 
(n = 4), complaint of persistent nasopharyngeal pain (n = 2), and 
sometimes associated coughing. In 4 instances, EPM was discontinued 
when the child inadvertently removed the catheter, typically during a 
confusional arousal, and the parent declined reinsertion. 

Follow-up Polysomnography 

Among the 54 children who underwent polysomnography before 
surgery, 53 (98.1%) returned for a repeat polysomnogram 1 year later. 
One child was lost to follow-up. The EPM was offered but not required 
during follow-up sleep studies. Parent or child objections resulted in 
omission of EPM in 17 (32.1%) of the 53 follow-up studies. Some of 
these 17 families initially declined to participate in the repeat study altogether, 
until further conversation revealed that the main hesitation was 
the optional repeat EPM. Among the 36 children who did agree to repeat 
EPM, all tolerated the catheter insertion and EPM for at least 2 hours; 33 
tolerated it for the entire night with no reported adverse experiences. A 
total of 32 subjects had EPM for at least 2 hours both at baseline and follow-
up (Figure 1). 

DISCUSSION 

This study of school-aged children who underwent EPM shows that 
EPM is most often well tolerated among research volunteers, but many 
potential subjects or their parents choose not to participate. All attempted 
catheter insertions were successful. However, a substantial minority 

Table 1—Children who did or did not tolerate esophageal pressure 
monitoring and several possible influential factors.* 

All Children EPM EPM 
Tolerated = 
2hrs Not Tolerated = 
2hrs 
N=54 n= 38 n=16 
Mean age ± SD, y 8.4 ± 1.9 8.7 ± 1.9 7.8 ± 1.7 
Male, no. (%) 30 (55.6) 24 (63.2) 6 (37.5) 
AT group, no. (%) 47 (87.0) 33 (86.8) 14 (87.5) 
Disruptive behavior 
disorder, no. (%) 19 (35.2) 13 (34.2) 6 (37.5) 
Anxious state, no. (%) 20 (37.0) 14 (36.8) 6 (37.5) 
Large tonsils, no. (%) 43 (79.6) 30 (79.0) 13 (81.2) 
History of recurrent 
tonsillitis, no. (%) 10 (18.5) 8 (21.2) 2 (12.5) 
Mean body mass 
index ± SD, kg/m2 19.4 ± 4.5 19.0 ± 4.5 20.3 ± 4.3 

* For each variable, the difference between subjects who did and did not tolerate at least 2 
hours of esophageal pressure monitoring (EPM) was not significant (P > .05) by .2, 
Fisher’s exact test, or t test. 
AT refers to adenotonsillectomy. 
SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1024 Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During PSG in Children—Chervin et al 


of these children did not tolerate EPM for at least 2 hours. If subjects 
known to have declined participation in this research because of EPM 
are added to those who tolerated EPM for less than 2 hours, 58 (60%) of 
these 96 children could be considered to be EPM failures. Nearly all 
children, whether or not EPM was accepted, focused on this procedure 
as the most anxiety-provoking aspect of polysomnography, both before 
and after the night in the sleep laboratory. Similar or worse experiences 
could occur in clinical situations when young children may be forced to 
undergo EPM with or without their assent. Although this study has some 
limitations, it provides the largest published experience with tolerance of 
EPM in children and should help clinicians decide whether to use the 
procedure in clinical settings. 

The most important barriers to EPM are clearly the attitudes, apprehensions, 
and initial reactions to insertion of the catheter. When EPM 
was discontinued because a child inadvertently pulled the catheter, the 
desire to avoid reinsertion was the main obstacle to continued EPM. 
Important strategies to optimize acceptance of the procedure include 
psychological and physical considerations. During catheter insertion, as 
during the rest of the of the polysomnography hook-up process, children 
should be entertained by videos, television, or other distractions. The 
research protocol provided considerable preparation, coaching, and support, 
which may exceed that available in clinical practice settings. On the 
other hand, 2 options that may be feasible in clinical practice but were 
not in our research setting—exclusion of parents from the set-up room 
during insertion and shortening of the process to less than 5 minutes— 
may help considerably (personal communication, A. Giacomini, 
RPSGT, Stanford Sleep Disorders Laboratory). The current study used a 
6-Fr water-filled catheter to perform EPM, and this system may be better 
tolerated than considerably thicker esophageal balloons that have 
sometimes been used for the same purpose.12 Flushing the catheter with 
warm water before insertion may make the catheter more pliable. The 
application of topical viscous lidocaine may help with insertion but can 
be an additional disagreeable experience for many children. 

Several factors hypothesized to influence the chance of successful 
EPM did not prove to be relevant; these included young age, female sex, 
a disruptive behavior disorder, anxiety state, large tonsils, and history of 
recurrent tonsillitis. To our knowledge, little information has been published 
previously on factors that may predict children’s tolerance of 
EPM or other minimally invasive throat procedures, such as pharyngoscopy. 
We speculate that parental acceptance of the importance and 
feasibility of EPM is also critical to the success of the endeavor. 

In practice, the decision of whether to use EPM during polysomnography 
in children hinges not only on its tolerability, but also on the value 
of information to be derived from the procedure. Evidence that some 
children suffer from sleepiness or behavior problems in association with 
UARS is highly suggestive5; some evidence implies that consideration 
of respiratory event–related arousals in addition to apneas and hypopneas 
helps to predict excessive sleepiness in patients evaluated for 
SDB.18 The UARS can be missed during polysomnography that monitors 
breathing only with thermocouples or thermistors and piezoelectric 
belts, the equipment most commonly used in clinical sleep laboratories.4 
However, available data are not convincing that the gold-standard EPM, 
rather than more-recently proposed, better-tolerated alternatives, is 
required. In particular, nasal pressure monitoring may offer a reasonable 
way to detect respiratory event–related arousals.7 One study compared 
nasal pressure to EPM in 15 adults and concluded that results are similar, 
though nasal pressure detected nearly 20% more events than could 
be confirmed by EPM.19 Data on nasal pressure monitoring in children 
are scarce. Recent reports confirm its feasibility in the sleep laboratory9,10 
but demonstrate suboptimal reliability in home ambulatory studies.
20 One important concern with nasal pressure monitoring, particularly 
in children, is that mouth breathing is ignored or, when 1 cannula is 
directed toward the mouth, poorly detected. An optimal arrangement 
may be to use nasal cannulas in combination with an oral thermocouple 
or thermistor. 

Other alternatives to EPM may include pulse transit time, the forced 

oscillation technique, diaphragmatic electromyography, a suprasternalnotch 
motion detector, or simply more sensitive scoring methods applied 
to currently standard technology.12,21 For example, no study has adequately 
compared EPM to results of thermocouple and piezoelectric 
band-derived data scored such that hypopneas are defined by a 20% 
decrease in any signal in association with an arousal or mild oxygen 
desaturation. This sensitive definition of hypopneas potentially could 
allow detection of subtle events otherwise detected only by EPM or 
nasal pressure monitoring. 

Finally, a consideration that limits the value of EPM, nasal pressure, 
or any substitute is that published reports do not adequately define normal 
and abnormal results based on prediction of important childhood 
outcomes. Most studies that discuss outcomes of SDB in children have 
used thermocouples or thermistors, a minority have used EPM, and virtually 
none have used nasal pressure. Outcomes related to levels of disease 
defined by results of 1 technique will not necessarily show similar 
associations with identical levels of disease as defined by other techniques. 
Furthermore, few published reports consider the possibility that 
even if standard techniques do miss many respiratory event–related 
arousals, results may correlate with more sensitive measures sufficiently 
to allow equally effective identification of clinically significant SDB, 
albeit with different cut-offs for abnormal findings. 

Among limitations that must be considered in the interpretation of the 
current results, the most important is that subjects and parents were volunteers 
in a research setting, not patients referred to a sleep laboratory. 
Inclusion criteria specifically required absence of a clinically determined 
need for polysomnography. The majority of otolaryngology-referred 
children were diagnosed at the bedside with SDB; clinicians did not consider 
polysomnographic confirmation necessary, a point of view that is 
highly prevalent among North American otolaryngologists though rare 
among sleep specialists.22,23 In clinical settings, EPM ordered by a clinician 
is considered necessary because the health-related benefit is judged 
important to the individual child. Under such circumstances, the parents 
are more likely than those of research volunteers to insist that catheters 
be inserted and remain inserted for the duration of the night. Children 
and technicians who know that the procedure is not “optional” may have 
more success with EPM than do those who participate in research studies. 
Most of the research subjects were initially studied just before a 
scheduled surgical procedure that may have increased their general anxiety 
levels and apprehension about any medical intervention. On the 
other hand, children looking forward to toy-store research rewards, 
though not contingent on success with EPM, may have had some positive 
motivation that children studied for clinical purposes would not 
share. In practice, children less than 5 years old are commonly referred 
for polysomnographic assessment of SDB, and this group could be less 
tolerant of EPM than were the older children in this study. We speculate 
that the net influence of factors specific to research settings is likely to 
reduce, rather than enhance, EPM success rates in children. The nature 
of the problems that occur, however, is unlikely to differ between 
research and clinical settings. 

Considerable controversy exists, even in the near absence of relevant 
published data, over how well EPM can be tolerated by children. The 
current data begin to fill this void: despite evidence that EPM can provide 
important information,4,5,8 most sleep laboratories do not use EPM 
for pediatric studies, mainly because of concern—largely unstudied— 
that it is not well tolerated. Our data seem to suggest that EPM should 
not be a barrier to polysomnography in most children who assent to EPM 
in clinical practice. However, many families may not assent if given a 
choice, and nearly all will have apprehension about it. Less-invasive 
methods to acquire the same information would be preferable, if they 
can be adequately validated. Until then, clinicians who decide whether 
to use EPM must consider the desire for the additional information provided, 
current knowledge about potential substitutes for this gold standard, 
clinical characteristics for any individual that may affect tolerance 
of EPM, and the knowledge that EPM probably will be the most problematic 
aspect of the sleep laboratory experience for children and fami-

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1025 Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During PSG in Children—Chervin et al 


lies involved. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors thank the children and parents who participated in this 
research for their interest, time, altruism, and courage. 

REFERENCES 

1. 
Gislason T, Benediktsdottir B. Snoring, apneic episodes and nocturnal hypoxemia 
among children 6 months to 6 years old: an epidemiologic study of lower limit of prevalence. 
Chest 1995;107:963-6. 
2. 
Redline S, Tishler PV, Schluchter M, Aylor J, Clark K, Graham G. Risk factors for sleep 
disordered breathing in children: associations with obesity, race, and respiratory problems. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:1527-32. 
3. 
Ali NJ, Pitson DJ, Stradling JR. Snoring, sleep disturbance, and behaviour in 4-5 year 
olds. Arch Dis Child 1993;68:360-6. 
4. 
Guilleminault C, Stoohs R, Clerk A, Cetel M, Maistros P. A cause of excessive daytime 
sleepiness: the upper airway resistance syndrome. Chest 1993;104:781-7. 
5. 
Guilleminault C, Winkle R, Korobkin R, Simmons B. Children and nocturnal snoring— 
evaluation of the effects of sleep related respiratory resistive load and daytime functioning. 
Eur J Pediatr 1982;139:165-71. 
6. 
Downey RI, Perkin RM, Macquarrie J. Upper airway resistance syndrome: sick, symptomatic 
but underrecognized. Sleep 1993;16:620-3. 
7. 
American Academy of Sleep Medicine Task Force. Sleep-related breathing disorders in 
adults: recommendations for syndrome definition and measurement techniques in clinical 
research. Sleep 1999;22:667-89. 
8. 
Guilleminault C, Pelayo R, Leger D, Clerk A, Bocian RCZ. Recognition of sleep-disordered 
breathing in children. Pediatrics 1996;98:871-82. 
9. 
Serebrisky D, Cordero R, Mandeli J, Kattan M, Lamm C. Assessment of inspiratory flow 
limitation in children with sleep-disordered breathing by a nasal cannula pressure transducer 
system. Pediatr Pulmonol 2002;33:380-7. 
10. 
Trang H, Leske V, Gaultier C. Use of nasal cannula for detecting sleep apneas and 
hypopneas in infants and children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:464-8. 
11. 
Lorino A, Lorino H, Dahan E, D’ortho Mp, Coste A, Harf A, Lofaso F. Effects of nasal 
prongs on nasal airflow resistance. Chest 2000;118:366-71. 
12. 
Kushida CA, Giacomini A, Lee MK, Guilleminault C, Dement WC. Technical protocol 
for the use of esophageal manometry in the diagnosis of sleep-related breathing disorders. 
Sleep Med 2002;3:163-73. 
13. 
Chediak AD, Demirozu MC, Nay KN. Alpha EEG sleep produced by balloon catheterization 
of the esophagus. Sleep 1990;13:369-70. 
14. 
Chervin RD, Archbold KH. Hyperactivity and polysomnographic findings in children 
evaluated for sleep-disordered breathing. Sleep 2001;24:313-20. 
15. 
Chervin RD, Aldrich MS. Effects of esophageal pressure monitoring on sleep architecture. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;156:881-5. 
16. 
Asher MI, Coates AL, Collinge JM, Milic-Emili J. Measurement of pleural pressure in 
neonates. J Appl Physiol 1982;52:491-4. 
17. 
National Institute of Mental Health. Children’s Psychiatric Rating Scale—NIMH. 
Psychopharmacol Bull 1985;21:770. 
18. 
Hosselet JJ, Ayappa I, Norman RG, Krieger AC, Rapoport DM. Classification of sleep-
disordered breathing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:398-405. 
19. 
Ayappa I, Norman RG, Krieger AC, Rosen A, O’Malley RL, Rapoport DM. Non-invasive 
detection of respiratory effort-related arousals (RERAs) by a nasal cannula/pressure 
transducer system. Sleep 2000;23:763-71. 
20. 
Goodwin JL, Enright PL, Kaemingk KL, et al. Feasibility of using unattended 
polysomnography in children for research—report of the Tucson Children’s Assessment 
Of Sleep Apnea Study (TuCASA). Sleep 2001;24:937-44. 
21. 
Katz ES, Lutz J, Black C, Marcus CL. Pulse transit time in sleep apnea. Pediatr Res 
2003;53:580-8. 
22. 
Weatherly RA, Mai EF, Ruzicka DL, Chervin RD. Identification and evaluation of 
obstructive sleep apnea prior to adenotonsillectomy in children: a survey of practice patterns. 
Sleep Med 2003;4:297-307. 
23. 
Section on Pediatric Pulmonology, Subcommittee on Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
Syndrome. Clinical practice guideline: diagnosis and management of childhood obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics 2002;109:704-12. 
SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 
1026 Esophageal Pressure Monitoring During PSG in Children—Chervin et al 


