Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
Use In Children With Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea Younger Than 2 Years of Age*

Ralph Downey III, Ronald M. Perkin and Joanne MacQuarrie 

Chest 2000;117;1608-1612 
DOI 10.1378/chest.117.6.1608 

The online version of this article, along with updated information 
and services can be found online on the World Wide Web at: 

http://www.chestjournal.org/content/117/6/1608.full.html 

CHEST is the official journal of the American College of ChestPhysicians. It has been published monthly since 1935. Copyright 2007 
by the American College of Chest Physicians, 3300 Dundee Road, 
Northbrook IL 60062. All rights reserved. No part of this article or PDF 
may be reproduced or distributed without the prior written permission 
of the copyright holder. 
(http://www.chestjournal.org/misc/reprints.shtml) ISSN:0012-3692 


Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



Nasal 
Continuous 
Positive 
Airway 
Pressure 
Use 
In 
Children 
With 
Obstructive 
Sleep 
Apnea 
Younger 
Than 
2 
Years 
of 
Age* 


Ralph Downey III, PhD; Ronald M. Perkin, MD, MA; and 
Joanne MacQuarrie, RRT, RPSGT 

Study objectives: To assess the efficacy of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) in 
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) patients who are < 
2 years of age. 
Design: A retrospective chart review of 18 patients from 1992 to 1999 who had OSA confirmed by 
polysomnography. All patients in this study also completed a separate night of CPAP polysomnography 
to determine the effectiveness of CPAP in the correction of OSA. Nasal CPAP compliance data 
were gathered via clinical follow-up examination, telephone interview, or mailed questionnaire. 
Setting: All patients were studied in the Sleep Disorders Center at Loma Linda University Children’s 
Hospital in Loma Linda, CA. 
Patients: All patients were < 
2 years old. 
Intervention: After OSA was confirmed by the results of technician-attended nocturnal polysomnography, 
separate technician-attended nocturnal CPAP polysomnography was completed. On CPAP 
nights, CPAP pressure was titrated to ameliorate OSA and snoring. CPAP pressure was increased by 
2-cm H2O or 1-cm H2O increments. 
Results: Data were analyzed by dependent groups t test at p < 
0.05 level of significance. CPAP 
statistically improved respiratory parameters significantly when compared to baseline polysomnography. 
The following four patient subgroups emerged from the analysis: group 1 consisted of six 
patients who had tracheostomies prior to the CPAP trial, with two patients using CPAP as an 
alternative to tracheostomy; group 2 consisted of two patients who had previous unsuccessful 
adenostonsillectomies and who used CPAP successfully, with both having OSA resolution over time; 
group 3 consisted of four patients who did not tolerate CPAP on the study night; and group 4 
consisted of six patients who used CPAP nightly, had OSA resolution over time, and therefore, no 
longer needed CPAP therapy. Thus, 10 of 18 patients used CPAP either on an interim basis for 
corrective therapy or as a primary treatment modality for OSA. 
Conclusions: These data show that children < 
2 years of age can tolerate and use CPAP effectively. 
In several cases, CPAP treatment could be discontinued as OSA resolved over time. The reasons for 
this are discussed in the text. (CHEST 2000; 117:1608–1612) 

Key words: children; continuous positive airway pressure compliance; infancy; obstructive sleep apnea; nasal continuous 
positive airway pressure; sleep; sleep disorders 

Abbreviations: CPAP . 
continuous positive airway pressure; OSA . 
obstructive sleep apnea 

T
T
he incidence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in 
children is high, with an estimated proportion 
between 1% and 3%.1 The peak incidence of OSA is 

*From the Loma Linda University Medical Center Children’s 
Hospital (Drs. Downey and Perkin, and Ms. MacQuarrie), Loma 
Linda, CA; and the Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veterans Administration 
Medical Center (Dr. Downey), Loma Linda, CA. 
Manuscript received July 15, 1999; revision accepted February 8, 
2000. 

Correspondence to: Ralph Downey III, PhD, Jerry L. Pettis Memorial 
Veterans Medical Center Sleep Disorders Center (111P), 
11201 Benton St, Loma Linda, CA 92357; e-mail: Ralph.Downey@ 
med.va.gov 

between ages 2 and 6 years, when lymphoid tissue 
growth is at its peak.1 OSA lies on a continuum that 
ranges from mild snoring to OSA with significant 
clinical consequences.2 The effects of OSA are pervasive, 
including decreased cognitive function,3 cardiovascular 
complications such as cor pulmonale, 
and overt congestive heart failure.4,5 Moreover, infants 
. 
1 year old with OSA may be at increased risk 
of sudden infant death syndrome.6 

Adenotonsillectomy is a common OSA treatment 
in children between 2 and 6 years of age; however, it 
is not used as commonly for children . 
2 years of 

Clinical 
Investigations

Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



age. Children with OSA also have a greater risk of 
respiratory compromise following adenotonsillectomy 
than children without OSA.7,8 

Traditionally, while continuous positive airway 
pressure (CPAP) is the most common OSA treatment 
in adults, it is not commonly used in children. 
The reason that CPAP has not been used in this age 
group in unclear. Perhaps its lack of use is due to a 
lack of data establishing its utility. CPAP may provide 
a useful treatment alternative among those for 
whom surgical correction is not indicated or has 
failed to resolve the OSA.9 

Few studies have investigated CPAP use in children 
. 
2 years old. The studies that are available 
have examined CPAP efficacy in children across a 
wide age spectrum9–14 or have focused on those . 
1 
year old.13,15,16 Moreover, CPAP is not used in a 
consistent fashion among even the most experienced 
centers across a wide age span.11 One study noted 
that CPAP use was not routinely or consistently 
used, even among 11 experienced sleep centers.15 
For example, in one center, CPAP was the primary 
therapy mode for OSA patients, while in 76% of the 
centers adenotonsillectomy was the primary therapy 
mode for OSA. The centers most likely to use CPAP 
were those closely affiliated with adult sleep centers. 
No study has focused on children . 
2 years of age 
exclusively. 

The purpose of this report is to demonstrate that 
CPAP is efficacious in children with OSA who are 

. 
2 years of age 
Materials and Methods 

We retrospectively examined the last 18 patients . 
2 years of 
age who had received a diagnosis of OSA by standard clinical 
polysomnography and who consented to the use of nasal CPAP as 
an elective treatment for their OSA. If a correctable cause of OSA 
was not considered as an effective alternative at the time of 
evaluation, CPAP was presented to the parents and referring 
physicians as an alternative treatment for OSA. 

All polysomnography was completed using a polysomnograph 
(model 78D; Grass; Quincy, MA). Measurements included the 
following: left and right electro-oculogram; EEG (leads C3-A2, 
O1-A2, and C4-A1); chin electromyogram; airflow (three-bead 
oral-nasal thermistor); chest wall and abdominal wall movement 
measurement using inductive plethysmography; end-tidal CO2 
monitoring; one-lead ECG; pulse oximetry with strip recorder 
(model 3700; Ohmeda; Madison, WI, or model 7000; Novametrix; 
Wallingford, CT). Pulse wave forms were measured from 
oximetry and displayed on the polysomnograms to help verify the 
accuracy of the oximetry readings. 

Sleep Scoring 

Patient records were scored in accordance with published 
guidelines. If children had sleep spindles, their sleep architectures 
were scored in accordance with Rechtshaffen and Kales.17 
If sleep spindles were not noted, sleep was scored as rapid eye 

movement, non-rapid eye movement, or indeterminate. EEG 
arousals were scored in accordance with American Sleep Disorders 
Association established guidelines.18 

Sleep Respiration 

OSA was diagnosed in patients if they had more than one 
obstructive apnea per hour (no airflow in the presence of chest 
wall excursion).11 Obstructive apnea was scored when there was 
no airflow despite chest wall excursion for at least 6 s, or . 
6sif 
the obstructive apnea was associated with oxygen desaturation of 

. 
3%. Central apnea was scored in the same manner as obstructive 
apnea except there was no airflow and no chest wall 
excursion. Hypopneas were included in the apnea index if there 
was a . 
50% reduction in airflow for . 
6 s. The results of each 
study were considered normal or abnormal in accordance with 
established norms.19 Between-scorer agreement for polysomnography 
was . 
90% for sleep and respiratory parameters. End-tidal 
CO2 and paradoxical breathing were examined; however, these 
data were not suitable for reliable analysis. 
CPAP Trial Methods 

In all study patients, polysomnography established the diagnosis 
of OSA on a separate baseline polysomnography. On a 
separate night, CPAP was applied. Only the data from the 
baseline polysomnography and the first CPAP polysomnography 
were analyzed for the purpose of this article. Eighteen patients 

. 
2 years of age completed both a baseline polysomnography and 
a separate night CPAP polysomnography. No patient in this study 
group under analysis received bilevel positive airway pressure. 
Patients did not have training with CPAP before their CPAP 
study night. Parents had the reasons for CPAP use explained to 
them and were given information on the known reasons why 
CPAP was thought to be of benefit for their child. Parents agreed 
to allow the use of CPAP as a therapy for correcting OSA in their 
children. 

CPAP Titration 

The goal of the initial CPAP trial night was to abolish both 
apnea and snoring while maintaining patient comfort so that the 
patient and parent would use CPAP at home. CPAP was started 
at5cmH2O in all patients, and then was titrated by 2.0-cm H2O 
increments until both OSA and snoring were abolished. Technicians 
used their respective judgments and assessments of sleep-
EEG arousals, leaks from the masks, and respiratory patterns 
(apnea) to adjust the CPAP in 1.0-cm H2O increments to provide 
the best possible patient comfort. Four patients required more 
than one CPAP trial night to obtain optimal effectiveness. As the 
study took place over 7 years, different interfaces have been 
developed and used. Many of the early patients in this study used 
custom-made masks, commercially available pediatric-sized 
masks (Respironics; Murrysville, PA), or nasal pillows. Full-face 
masks were not needed for the patients in this study. 

Home CPAP Use 

After the CPAP titration night, parents who agreed to treatment 
had CPAP available for use in their homes at pressures 
determined by the results of the CPAP polysomnography. Mask 
preference on the night of the CPAP study was the mask 
prescribed for home use. The patient’s personal physician, with 
the sleep center staff, followed each patient. Follow-up for 
compliance and care was by clinical follow-up and/or questionnaires 
sent to the patient’s home or by telephone conversation to 

CHEST 
/ 
117/6/ 
JUNE, 
2000 
1609

Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



assess the degree of CPAP use and the reasons for intolerance or Table 2–Patients for Whom CPAP Was Used* 

discomfort, if any. CPAP timers were not used because not every 
patient had a CPAP timer on their device. Using this method of 
compliance checking for some and not for all may have biased our 
assessment of compliance. 

Data Analysis 

All data were analyzed using a two-tailed, dependent-groups t 
test, with an a priori p level . 
0.05 set for statistical significance. 

Results 

All patients were . 
2 years of age at the time of the 
initial CPAP study; 11 patients were . 
1 year of age, 
and 7 patients were between 1 and 2 years of age. 

The studied children had a variety of medical 
disorders that were thought to be contributing factors 
to their OSA. Patient diagnoses and final known 
dispositions are listed in Tables 1 and 2. 

Patients selected for CPAP use fell into four group 
types. In group 1, six OSA patients underwent a 
tracheostomy to treat their existing OSA. These 
patients had CPAP applied with their tracheostomies 
occluded in an attempt to correct their OSA. In this 
group, four patients required continued tracheostomy 
and elected not to use CPAP. Two patients 
used CPAP initially. One patient used CPAP until 
OSA resolved, and one patient accepted CPAP on 
the study night, used it for almost 1 year, but then 
elected tracheostomy as a long-term treatment for 
OSA. In cases requiring decannulation, an otolaryngologist 
was consulted. 

Group 2 consisted of two patients whose adenotonsillectomies 
failed to correct their OSA. Both 
patients had their OSA resolve over time, which 
allowed CPAP to be discontinued. 

Group 3 consisted of four patients who did not 
accept CPAP on the initial CPAP study night. Of 
these, one patient was obese with hypothyroidism, 
two required craniofacial surgery, and one had laryngomalacia 
and was lost to follow-up (Table 1). 

Initial CPAP 
Treatment Pressure, 
Patient No./Pre-PSG Diagnosis cm H2O† 
1/Laryngomalacia 7; 2 L/min O2 
2/Bronchopulmonary dysplasia 7 
3/Laryngomalacia 6; 1 L/min O2 
4/Post-T&A with residual OSA 6; 2 L/min O2 
5/Down’s syndrome 7; 2 L/min O2 
6/Laryngomalacia 11 
7/CHF 8; 1 L/min O2 
8/Primary OSA, with ALTE history 8 
9/Post-T&A with residual OSA 7 
10/Pierre Robin syndrome 9 

*Patients 1 to 9 received CPAP until resolution of OSA (documented 
by PSG). Patient 10 received CPAP for 1 year, at which time an 
elective tracheostomy was performed. ALTE . 
apparent life-
threatening episode; PSG . 
polysomnography. See Table 1 for 
other abbreviations. 

†Values after the semicolon are for supplemental oxygen therapy. 
Group 4 consisted of six patients who received 
CPAP until follow-up polysomnography demonstrated 
that their OSA had resolved. These patients 
had a wide spectrum of disorders, including bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia, Down’s syndrome, laryngomalacia, 
pharyngeal flap airway obstruction, congestive 
heart failure, and primary OSA presenting as an 
apparent life-threatening episode. CPAP was used 
for approximately 1 to 5 years in this group; three 
patients had two polysomnography sessions to document 
the complete resolution of OSA, and three 
patients had one polysomnography session to document 
complete resolution. 

Table 3 lists the following statistically significant 
parameters that changed with CPAP treatment: the 
apnea index was significantly reduced (in all studied 
patients), as was the time of the longest apnea; and 
the arterial oxygen saturation nadir improved with 
CPAP, as did the number of minutes that the 
patients slept with arterial oxygen saturation at 

Table 1–Patients Who Did Not Use CPAP* 

Diagnoses Post-CPAP Trial Disposition 
Patients who elected not to use CPAP 
Hypoventilation syndrome Tracheostomy continued 
Hypoventilation, CHF Tracheostomy continued 
Pierre Robin syndrome Tracheostomy continued 
CHF/pulmonary HTN Tracheostomy continued 
Patients intolerant to CPAP on the CPAP trial night 
Pierre Robin syndrome Craniofacial management 
Laryngomalacia Lost to follow-up 
Obesity, hypothyroidism T&A; UPPP 
Crouzon’s syndrome Craniofacial management 

*T&A . 
adenotonsillectomy; UPPP . 
uvulopalatopharyngoplasty surgery; CHF . 
congestive heart failure; HTN . 
hypertension. 

1610 
Clinical 
Investigations

Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



Table 3–Significant Polysomnographic Variables That 
Changed From Baseline Polysomnogram to CPAP 
Polysomnogram in Children With OSA (n . 
18)* 

PSG 
t Test 
Variable Baseline CPAP (df) 
No. of awakenings . 
15 s† 13.5 . 
14.8 5.5 . 
5.2 0.9 (15)‡ 
Apnea index 12.8 . 
20.0 4.5 . 
13.4 4.4 (16)§ 
Obstructive apnea index 4.7 . 
13.4 2.0 . 
7.3 3.8 (16)§ 
Hypopnea apnea index 6.7 . 
12.7 2.0 . 
5.7 8.7 (16)‡ 
Longest apnea, s 25.6 . 
17.4 8.2 . 
7.3 3.9 (17). 
Minimum Sao2,% 74.8 . 
20.1 87.3 . 
9.5 2.3 (17)‡ 
Sao2 . 
90%, min 22.2 . 
25.5 6.4 . 
14.9 2.3 (15)‡ 

*Values given as mean . 
SD. df . 
degrees of freedom; Sao2 . 
arterial oxygen saturation. See Table 1 for other abbreviation. 

†For the entire sleep period. 
‡p . 
0.05. 
§p . 
0.0001. 
\p . 
0.001. 
. 
90%. Complete abolition of OSA was not always 
possible due to patient discomfort or severity of the 
disease. 
The mean (SD) arousal index was 16.31 (12.29) 
while not receiving CPAP and 16.06 (13.56) while 
receiving CPAP. Five patients needed supplemental 
oxygen in addition to CPAP (range, 0.5 to 6 L/min) 
(Table 2). The median CPAP pressure was 7.0 cm 
H2O. 

Sleep Architecture 

Sleep stages did not significantly differ between 
those measured with baseline polysomnography and 
CPAP polysomnography. Patients fell asleep in . 
13 
min, on average, during their baseline studies and 
with CPAP. 

Discussion 

These data demonstrate that CPAP is an effective 
treatment for OSA in patients who are . 
2 years old 
across a wide disease spectrum. This study supports 
and extends the findings of Guilleminault and colleagues16 
concerning OSA in infants . 
1 year of age 
to those . 
2 years of age. An important finding of 
this study was that OSA resolved over time in nine 
children. It is unlikely that CPAP “cured” OSA. OSA 
resolution may have resulted, in part, from the 
nature of the children’s disorders concomitant with 
OSA, such as bronchopulmonary dysplasia, laryngomalacia, 
and congestive heart failure. These disorders 
may resolve with maturity. Moreover, corrective 
surgery, while not completely successful at correcting 
OSA in this study group, may have served to 
widen the upper airway and may have contributed to 

apnea resolution with maturity. The important point 
is that CPAP helped these patients safely reach the 
age at which OSA was resolved. 

The success of CPAP in correcting OSA could not 
be predicted based on the admitting diagnosis. With 
a small data set, statistical analysis is not likely to 
reveal a singular predictor of CPAP success. If there 
is a cautionary tale in this regard, it is that some 
patients, such as those with Down’s syndrome, could 
easily have been dismissed as “poor candidates for 
CPAP,” but in fact tolerated CPAP well. 

A significant number of patients were evaluated 
after surgery, with six having examinations because 
of the question of the need for continued tracheostomy. 
In patients studied with their tracheostomy 
tube plugged, it was thought that CPAP could not 
treat their OSA as effectively because there was a 
question as to whether these patients would tolerate 
CPAP at home. The subgroups of patients illustrate 
the heterogeneity of the CPAP population in the 
young age group studied. 

Surprisingly, the EEG arousal index did not 
change from the baseline polysomnography to the 
nasal CPAP polysomnography, perhaps due to the 
lack of CPAP adaptation on the part of the patient. It 
may be that the arousal index, as a treatment-guiding 
parameter, may be misleading for a single-night 
CPAP study. Other indexes of improvement may be 
more sensitive to change, such as esophageal pressures, 
which were not measured in this study. If the 
theory that arousal is due to CPAP is correct, one 
would expect the arousal index to decrease over 
time, but that was not examined in this study. 

Complications from CPAP in this age group were 
not unlike those seen in adults, with the most 
common being mask discomfort, rhinitis, and airway 
dryness. No patients had pneumothorax or barotrauma. 


Further improvements in the use of CPAP in 
young children may come from studies like this one, 
which demonstrate that CPAP can be used effectively. 
With increased support services for CPAP 
users, CPAP use is likely to increase proportionally 
with patient and clinician comfort levels. Moreover, 
with time and the acquisition of more data refining 
CPAP use in young children, clinicians will find a 
place for CPAP in the OSA treatment armament. 

Conclusion 

The main findings of this study were the following: 

(1) CPAP improved OSA in all study patients; (2) 
CPAP can be accepted and tolerated well by a 
majority of patients with severe OSA who are . 
2 
years of age; (3) CPAP is an effective treatment 
CHEST 
/ 
117/6/ 
JUNE, 
2000 
1611

Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



modality in children with OSA; and (4) CPAP was 
not a permanent treatment, as nine patients no 
longer required CPAP based on follow-up polysomnography-
documented resolution of OSA. Some of 
these patients had self-limiting medical problems for 
which CPAP may have acted as an interim treatment 

modality. 

A consensus about how CPAP can be used across 
patient populations in children with OSA would be 
of benefit to sleep centers in which patients with 
OSA are frequently seen. This is particularly relevant 
in instances where little benefit occurs by using 
surgery or alternate therapies. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: The authors thank Michelle Gasca 
for data compilation and Grennith Zimmerman, PhD, for help in 
the statistical analysis of the data. 

References 

1 Rosen C. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) in 
children: diagnostic challenges. Sleep 1996; 19(suppl):S274 – 
S277 

2 Downey R III, Perkin RM, MacQuarrie J. Upper airway 
resistance syndrome: sick, symptomatic but underrecognized. 
Sleep 1993; 16:620–623 

3 Dahl RE. The impact of inadequate sleep on children’s 
daytime cognitive function. Semin Pediatr Neurol 1996; 
3:44–50 

4 Perkin RM, Downey R III, MacQuarrie J. Sleep disordered 
breathing in infants and children. Respir Care Clin N Am 
1999; 5:395– 426 

5 Brouillette RT, Fernbach SK, Hunt CE. Obstructive sleep 
apnea in infants and children. J Pediatr 1982; 100:31–40 

6 Kahn A, Groswasser J, Rebutffat E, et al. Sleep and cardiorespiratory 
characteristics of infant victims of sudden death: a 
prospective case-control study. Sleep 1992; 15:287–292 

7 Wiatrak BJ, Myer CMD, Andrews TM. Complications of 
adenotonsillectomy in children under 3 years of age. Am J 
Otolaryngol 1991; 12:170–172 

8 Williams EFD, Woo P, Miller R, et al. The effects of 
adenotonsillectomy on growth in young children. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1991; 104:509–516 

9 Guilleminault C, Nino-Murcia G, Heldt G, et al. Alternative 

treatment of tracheostomy in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: 
nasal continuous positive airway pressure in young 
children. Pediatrics 1986; 78:797–802 

10 Downey R III, Perkin RM, MacQuarrie J, et al. Six years 
experience with nasal CPAP in children with obstructive 
sleep apnea [abstract]. Sleep Res 1997; 26:355 

11 Marcus CL, Ward SL, Mallory GB, et al. Use of nasal 
continuous positive airway pressure as treatment of childhood 
obstructive sleep apnea. J Pediatr 1995; 127:88 –94 

12 Waters K, Everett F, Harris MA, et al. Use of nasal mask 
CPAP instead of tracheostomy for palliative care in two 
children. J Paediatr Child Health 1994; 30:179 –181 

13 Waters K, Everett F, Bruderer JW, et al. Obstructive sleep 
apnea: the use of nasal CPAP in 80 children. Am J Respir Crit 
Care Med 1995; 152:780 –785 

14 Brooks L, Sleeper G. Use of nasal CPAP by children in the 
home [abstract]. Sleep Res 1991; 20:212 

15 Marcus CL, Ward SL, Mallory GB, et al. Use of nasal 
continuous positive airway pressure as treatment of childhood 
obstructive sleep apnea. J Pediatr 1995; 127:88 –94 

16 Guilleminault C, Pelayo R, Clerk A, et al, Home nasal 
continuous positive airway pressure in infants with sleep-
disordered breathing. J Pediatr 1995; 127:905–912 

17 Rechtschaffen A, Kales A. A manual of standardized terminology, 
techniques, and scoring system for sleep stages of 
human subjects. Los Angeles, CA: University of California at 
Los Angeles Brain Research Institute, 1968 

18 American Sleep Disorders Association Sleep Disorders Atlas 
Task Force. EEG arousals: scoring rules and examples. Sleep 
1992; 15:173–184 

19 Marcus CL, Omlin KJ, Basinski DJ. Normal polysomnographic 
values for children and adolescents. Am Rev Respir 
Dis 1992; 146:1235–1239 

1612 
Clinical 
Investigations

Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure Use In Children With 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Younger Than 2 Years of Age *


Ralph Downey III, Ronald M. Perkin and Joanne MacQuarrie 
Chest 2000;117; 1608-1612 
DOI 10.1378/chest.117.6.1608 


This information is current as of February 20, 2009 

& Services 
Updated Information 
http://www.chestjournal.org/content/117/6/1608.full.html 
high-resolution figures, can be found at: 
Updated Information and services, including 
References 
html#ref-list-1 
http://www.chestjournal.org/content/117/6/1608.full. 
accessed free at: 
This article cites 17 articles, 2 of which can be 
Citations 
html#related-urls 
http://www.chestjournal.org/content/117/6/1608.full. 
articles: 
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted 
Open Access 
option 
Freely available online through CHEST open access 
Permissions & Licensing 
http://chestjournal.org/misc/reprints.shtml 
(figures, tables) or in its entirety can be found online at: 
Information about reproducing this article in parts 
Reprints 
http://chestjournal.org/misc/reprints.shtml 
Information about ordering reprints can be found online: 
Email alerting service 
online article. 
article. sign up in the box at the top right corner of the 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cit this 
format 
Images in PowerPoint 
format. See any online article figure for directions. 
downloaded for teaching purposes in PowerPoint slide 
Figures that appear in CHEST articles can be


Downloaded from www.chestjournal.org on February 20, 2009 
Copyright © 2000 American College of Chest Physicians 



