EPIDEMIOLOGY AND SLEEP 
Feasibility of Using Unattended Polysomnography in Children for Research— 
Report of the Tucson Children’s Assessment of Sleep Apnea Study (TuCASA) 

James L. Goodwin MS,1 Paul L. Enright MD,1 Kris L. Kaemingk PhD,1 Gerald M. Rosen MD,2 Wayne J. Morgan MD,1 Ralph F. Fregosi PhD,1 Stuart F. Quan MD1 

1Respiratory and Sleep Disorders Centers, Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ; 
2Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN 

Study Objectives: The Tucson Children’s Assessment of Sleep Apnea 
study (TuCASA) is designed to investigate the prevalence and correlates 
of objectively measured sleep-disordered breathing in pre-adolescent chil-
dren. This paper documents the methods and feasibility of attaining qual-
ity unattended polysomnograms in the first 162 TuCASA children recruit-
ed. 
Design: A prospective cohort study projected to enroll 500 children 
between 5 and 12 years of age who will undergo unattended polysomnog-
raphy, neurocognitive evaluation, and physiological and anatomical mea-
surements thought to be associated with sleep-disordered breathing. 
Setting: Children are recruited through the Tucson Unified School District. 
Polysomnograms and anthropometric measurements are completed in 
the child’s home. 
Participants: Of the 157 children enrolled in TuCASA, there were 100 
children (64%) between 5—8 years old and 57 children (36%) between 
the ages of 9 to 12. There were 74 (47%) Hispanic children, and 68 (43%) 
female participants. 
Interventions: N/A 
Measurements & Results: Technically acceptable studies were obtained 
in 157 children (97%). The initial pass rate was 91%, which improved to 
97% when 9 children who failed on the first night of recording completed 
a second study which was acceptable. In 152 studies (97%), greater than 
5 hours of interpretable respiratory, electroencephalographic, and oxime-
try signals were obtained. The poorest signal quality was obtained from 
the chin electromyogram and from the combination thermister/nasal can-
nula. Parents reported that 54% of children slept as well as, or better than 
usual, while 40% reported that their child slept somewhat worse than 
usual. Only 6% were observed to sleep much worse than usual. Night-
to-night variability in key polysomnographic parameters (n=10) showed a 
high degree of reproducibility on 2 different nights of study using identical 
protocols in the same child. In 5 children, polysomnograms done in the 
home were comparable to those recorded in a sleep laboratory. 
Conclusions: The high quality of data collected in TuCASA demon-
strates that multi-channel polysomnography data can be successfully 
obtained in children aged 5—12 years in an unattended setting under a 
research protocol. 
Key words: Sleep; polysomnography; children; obstructive sleep apnea; 
sleep-disordered breathing 
INTRODUCTION 

SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING (SDB) INCLUDING 
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA SYNDROME (OSAS) IS 
INCREASINGLY RECOGNIZED AS AN IMPORTANT 
CAUSE OF MORBIDITY IN CHILDREN. Clinical symptoms 
of OSAS in children include snoring, nocturnal arousals, restlessness 
during sleep, enuresis, daytime sleepiness, and hyperactivity.
1-4 Evidence also suggests that the adverse effects of frequent 
nocturnal arousals include behavioral, learning, and personality 
problems.5-7 While estimates indicate that the prevalence 
of OSAS is approximately 4% in adult men and 2% in adult 
women,8 no large epidemiological study using polysomnography 
has been conducted to determine the prevalence of SDB in young 
children. 

Polysomnography in adults with OSAS commonly demonstrates 
episodes of frank apnea although there is increasing 

Disclosure Statement 
This work was supported by grant HL 62373 from the National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute. It was presented in part at the Annual Meeting of the 
Association of Professional Sleep Societies, June 7, 2001. 
Accepted for publication September 2001 
Address correspondence to: James L. Goodwin, MS, Respiratory Sciences 
Center, University of Arizona College of Medicine, 1501 N. Campbell, 
Room 2305B, Tucson, AZ 857224; Tel: 520-626-6115; Fax: 520-626-6970; 
E-mail: jamieg@resp-sci.arizona.edu 
SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 937 


recognition that hypopneas and episodes of elevation in upper-
airway resistance are important as well.9-11 In contrast, 
polysomnography in children with OSAS frequently is characterized 
by hypopneas and periods of obstructive hypoventilation, 
with frank apnea found less commonly.12,13 Therefore, 
polysomnographic monitoring techniques and criteria used to 
define the presence of SDB developed for adults are not necessarily 
applicable to children. Recent interest in childhood OSAS 
has led to an increase in the number of polysomnograms performed 
in children. However, normal values for indices of SDB 
severity are not well defined, and it is unknown whether proposed 
abnormal values correlate with clinical outcomes. 
Although one study in a small number of children proposed normative 
ranges for apnea in children,14 similar guidelines for 
hypopnea and upper-airway resistance events in children have 
not been clearly established. To determine the level of severity 
of SDB which correlates with abnormal clinical outcomes, 
polysomnographic recordings are required from a large number 
of children with no clinical symptoms of OSAS and those with 
symptoms consistent with OSAS. It is quite expensive to study 
a large population of normal children with laboratory 
polysomnography due to the cost of laboratory time and the need 
to compensate families for their participation. Additionally, parents 
and their young children without known sleep problems 
often hesitate to spend a night in the unfamiliar setting of a sleep 
laboratory (particularly school aged children). Therefore, there is 
a need to develop techniques to perform unattended home 
polysomnographic recordings in children to accurately determine 

Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


the prevalence of SDB in children and to correlate severity levels 
of SDB with abnormal clinical outcomes. 

The Tucson Children’s Assessment of Sleep Apnea study 
(TuCASA) is a prospective cohort study designed to determine 
the prevalence rate of objectively documented SDB in pre-adolescent 
children and to investigate its relationship to symptoms, 
performance on neurobehavioral measures, and physiologic and 
anatomic risk factors. Up to 500 Caucasian and Hispanic children 
aged 5—12 years will undergo unattended polysomnography 
over the course of the four-year study. This report describes 
the methods used for obtaining and analyzing unattended home 
polysomnography data for the first 157 children enrolled in the 
TuCASA study. 

METHODS 

Selection of Participants 

Hispanic and Caucasian children aged 5 to 12 years were 
recruited to participate in the TuCASA study by soliciting the 
cooperation of selected elementary schools in the Tucson Unified 
School District (TUSD). TUSD is a very large district with an 
elementary school population representative of children living in 
Southern Arizona. To assure that an adequate mix of Hispanic 
and Caucasian children were recruited, elementary school populations 
were pre-screened so that at least 25%, but no more than 
75% of children attending the school were of self-reported 
Hispanic ethnicity. A short sleep habits questionnaire was sent 
home with children in a “notes home” folder. Parents were asked 
to complete the questions and provide some demographic information 
at a minimum, and to provide their contact information if 
they would allow study personnel to call them for screening. 
Incentives were provided to classrooms and schools in order to 
increase participation. The polysomnography testing protocol 
used in the TuCASA study was approved both by the University 
of Arizona Human Subjects and the TUSD Research 
Committees. 

Home Polysomnography 

An unattended home polysomnogram was scheduled as soon 
as possible after recruitment. A two-person, mixed gender team 
arrived at the home approximately one hour prior to the child’s 
normal bedtime. During the home visit, the following data were 
collected in addition to polysomnography: anthropometric measurements 
(height, weight, and neck circumference), a digital 
photograph of the oropharynx and tonsils, visual oropharynx 
inspection, seated blood pressure, and a more extensive sleep 
habits questionnaire. A morning survey was completed by the 
caregiver the following morning. 

Polysomnograms were obtained using the Compumedics PS2 
system (Abbotsford, Victoria, Australia). This monitor was 
chosen because of its portability, capability to record a full 
polysomnographic montage, flexibility of software, and successful 
use during other studies of home-based polysomnography.15 
Prior to implementing the TuCASA protocol, a feasibility study 
of 10 children with similar characteristics to those being studied 
in TuCASA demonstrated that the Compumedics system could be 
satisfactorily used in children. The system consists of a patient 
interface box (PIB) containing amplifiers and filters to which 

electrodes and sensors are connected. The PIB is attached by 
cable to the data acquisition recorder which contains a 40MB 
PCMCIA card, a 15-hour rechargeable battery, and an oximeter. 
The PIB, loose electrode wires, and sensor cables are secured 
inside a loose fitting vest which is worn by the child over his or 
her pajamas. The vest is a variation of the Compumedics adult 
vest, with modifications made specifically for studies of young 
children. The system contains a liquid crystal display (LCD) for 
visualizing signals after hook-up, and an internal impedance 
meter to verify electrode attachments. 

Sensors were placed and the equipment was calibrated by 
technicians during the evening home visit. Gauze, tape, water-
soluble pastes, and conductive gels were used to secure sensors 
and electrodes. The following signals were acquired as part of 
the TuCASA montage: C3/A2 and C4/A1 electroencephalogram 
(EEG), right and left electrooculogram (EOG), a bipolar sub-
mental electromyogram (EMG), thoracic and abdominal displacement 
(inductive plethysmography bands), airflow 
(nasal/oral thermister), nasal pressure cannula, oximetry (finger 
pulse oximeter, Nonin, Minneapolis, MN), ECG (single bipolar 
lead), snoring (microphone attached to the vest), body position 
(Hg gauge sensor), and ambient light (sensor attached to the vest 
to record on/off). The nasal pressure cannula was employed in an 
attempt to capture subtle SDB events related to elevations in 
upper airway resistance which otherwise might have been undetected. 
The thermister and nasal pressure signals were collected 
simultaneously by taping a nasal/oral thermister (Protec, 
Woodinville, WA) on the superior surface of a nasal cannula 
(Salter Labs, Arvin, CA). 

All signals were verified using the LCD, and impedances were 
checked to insure that values were <5 kohms. A written verification 
form was used to annotate impedances, any adverse environmental 
conditions, or any medical conditions requiring notification 
of a physician. The equipment was removed the following 
morning by a research technician or a parent. 

Data Handling 

Once the equipment was retrieved and cleaned, data stored in 
real time on a 40MB PCMCIA flashcard was downloaded for 
review. A preliminary examination of the raw data determined if 
artifact free signals were present for sufficient duration to allow 
scoring of the polysomnogram. Studies with <4 hours of oximetry, 
insufficient duration or quality of signal, or equipment malfunction 
during the night were marked as “failed.” Raw data 
from passing studies were immediately backed up to Zip Disk™ 
for storage, then transferred to a hard drive for scoring. Once 
scoring was completed, a copy of the raw data and a copy of each 
hypnogram generated from different scoring passes was archived 
onto a CD-RW disk. As a courtesy to parents of those children 
participating, a brief summary of anthropometric measurements 
and sleep characteristics was sent to the family within three 
weeks of the home visit. 

Scoring 

The Compumedics software system was used to process all 
polysomnograms (W-Series Replay, v 2.0, release 22). The scorer 
reviewed the record as shown on the computer monitor in three 
passes. During the first pass, sleep stages and arousals were 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 938 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


marked manually on a 30-second, epoch by epoch basis. During 
the second pass, respiratory signals were displayed in two or five 
minute epochs, and respiratory events were manually marked 
without visualizing the nasal pressure monitor. During the third 
pass, respiratory signals were displayed in two or five minute 
epochs, and respiratory events were manually marked using all 
respiratory monitors including nasal pressure. 

Sleep stages were scored according to Rechtshaffen and Kales 
criteria.16 Arousals were identified using criteria published by 
the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.17 Apneas were 
scored if the amplitude (peak to trough) of the airflow signal 
using the thermister decreased below at least 25% of the amplitude 
of “baseline” breathing (identified during a period of regular 
breathing with stable oxygen levels), if this change lasted for 
>6 seconds or two breath cycles. Hypopneas were designated if 
the amplitude of any respiratory signal decreased below (approximately) 
70% of the amplitude of “baseline” and if the thermister 
signal did not meet the criterion for apnea. If the thermister signal 
was not scorable, then the event was scored as a hypopnea. 
Upper-Airway events were identified if criteria for apnea/hypopnea 
were not met, but there was flattening of the contour of the 
nasal pressure signal18 lasting for =6 seconds or two breaths. 
“Central” events were marked if no displacement was noted on 
both the chest and abdominal inductance channels. Otherwise, 
events were scored as “obstructive.” Although desirable, we 
made no attempt to distinguish between central and obstructive 
hypopnea because reliable classification was not possible. In the 
absence of an esophageal balloon, paradox of the chest and 
abdominal inductance bands would be suggestive of an obstructive 
component to a hypopnea. While the scorable duration of 
these signals in our study was high (vide infra, Table 2), their 
quality was not adequate to distinguish between obstructive and 
central hypopnea on a consistent basis. 

After full scoring, analysis software was used to link each 
event to data from the oxygen saturation and EEG channels. This 
allowed characterization of events according to differing degrees 
of associated desaturations and arousals, or various combinations 
of these measures. In this manner, the Respiratory Disturbance 
Index (RDI) was defined as the number of respiratory events 
(apneas and hypopneas) per hour of the total sleep time. The 
Sleep Disordered Breathing index (SDBI) was defined as the 
number of apneas, hypopneas and upper airway events per hour 
of total sleep time. Compumedics software calculated these 
indices separately for REM and NREM sleep, and for different 
body positions. Summary measures of desaturation, sleep stages, 
arousal frequencies, and heart rate variation also were computed. 

The scorer assigned an overall quality grade of excellent (at 
least one EEG channel, one EOG channel, chin EMG, oximetry, 
airflow, thoracic, and abdominal bands good for >5 hours), good 
(at least two respiratory channels [airflow, thoracic or abdominal 
bands], oximetry, and one EEG good for >5 hours), or fair (respiratory 
channels [airflow or either band], oximetry, and one 
EEG were good for >4 hours but <5 hours). To receive the passing 
grade of fair, the EEG signal must have been of sufficient 
quality to determine sleep from wake. Any other problems with 
scoring that could affect reliability were annotated, as well as 
potential medical alerts such as heart rate >150 or <30 beats per 
minute for longer than 2 minutes, O2 saturation <75% for >10% 
of total sleep time, or RDI >25. 

All studies were scored by a single registered polysomnographic 
technologist who was required to demonstrate a complete 
understanding of the study’s scoring rules and to articulate reasons 
for assigning epoch by epoch codes for sleep and respiratory 
scoring. This was judged by a review of records with one of 
the investigators. Subsequently, the scorer periodically reviewed 
selected records with one of the investigators. Studies posing difficulties 
in scoring or interesting problems were reviewed by the 
scorer and other investigators during quality assurance meetings. 

Approximately 5% of studies were re-scored by the same 
scorer on a blinded basis to determine consistency in scoring. No 
systematic differences were observed between initial and rescored 
studies. Comparison of some key parameters on blind 
studies scored using the nasal thermister (RDI, total sleep time, 
and sleep efficiency) were highly correlated (p<.01). Similar 
results were found in studies scored with the addition of the nasal 
pressure cannula. Also, 12 children were asked to complete a second 
night of unattended polysomnography under conditions similar 
to the first recording in order to validate the reproducibility 
of major polysomnographic outcomes. A representative range of 
children were selected with respect to age, gender, and ethnicity. 
Children were only selected if the overall quality of the first PSG 
was excellent (n=10) or good (n=2), and both thermister and 
nasal pressure signals were of quality sufficient to score respiratory 
events. 

To compare the quality of TuCASA polysomnograms to those 
performed in a sleep laboratory, a small study was conducted 
with a sample of five children who had both a polysomnogram 
recorded at home and one recorded at the University of Arizona 
Sleep Disorders Center. Four children were selected from the 
TuCASA cohort to have a repeat study in the sleep laboratory 
within approximately seven weeks of their home polysomnogram. 
Children were selected for laboratory polysomnography if 
their home study was of excellent quality and the parent agreed 
to spend the night in the lab. One child was not a member of the 
TuCASA cohort, but had undergone a polysomnogram in the 
sleep laboratory for the diagnosis of sleep apnea. This child was 
studied in the home seven weeks after the laboratory polysomnogram. 
Studies acquired in the sleep laboratory used a Grass 
Heritage™ digital acquisition system (Astro-Med, Warwick, RI) 
but the same montage as that employed in the home polysomnograms. 
These lab studies were scored using the same criteria as 
those performed in the home. 

Statistical analysis was performed using STATA 6.0 for 
Windows (STATA Corporation, College Station, TX). The 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the distributions 
of key sleep parameters in the night-to-night and lab vs. home 
studies due to small sample sizes of ten and five respectively. 
Spearman rank correlation was used to compare variables for the 
blinded scoring studies. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was also 
used to compare the median RDI in samples scored with thermister 
versus nasal pressure due to skewness in the distribution 
of RDI. The Bland-Altman procedure was used to visually compare 
the difference in means for the night-to-night variability 
study.19 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 939 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


Table 1—Baseline characteristics 
Male (n=89) Female (n=68) Total (n=157) 
Age (years) 5—8 62 (40%) 38 (24%) 100 (64%) 
9—12 27 (17%) 30 (19%) 57 (36%) 
Ethnicity Cau 43 (27%) 40 (26%) 83 (53%) 
Hisp 46 (29%) 28 (18%) 74 (47%) 
BMI > 95 Yes 18 (12%) 8 (5%) 26 (17%) 
percentile No 71 (45%) 60 (38%) 131 (83%) 
Snore* Yes 29 (19%) 24 (15%) 53 (34%) 
No 60 (38%) 44 (28%) 104 (66%) 
EDS† Yes 25 (16%) 22 (14%) 47 (30%) 
No 64 (41%) 46 (29%) 110 (70%) 
BMI=Body Mass Index (kg/m2); EDS=Excessive Daytime Sleepiness; Cau=Caucasian; Hisp=Hispanic 
Response by parent to "How often does your child snore loudly?"* and "Is your child sleepy during the 
daytime?"† was occasionally, frequently, or almost always. 

Table 2—Quality of polysomnography 

Hours of Scorable Signal Mostly Free from Artifact (%) 

Hours Scorable =
==6 hours =
==4 but =
==2 but 
Signal (mean, SD) < 6 hours < 4 hours < 2 hours 

Abdominal Band 8.6 (1.3) 97% 3% 0% 1% 
Chest Band 8.6 (1.6) 94% 3% 1% 1% 
EOG 8.4 (1.5) 92% 6% 1% 1% 
Oximeter 8.3 (1.5) 92% 7% 1% 0% 
ECG 8.3 (1.5) 92% 7% 1% 0% 
EEG 8.1 (2.2) 89% 5% 3% 4% 
Chin EMG 7.7 (2.8) 84% 4% 3% 9% 
Thermister 6.1 (2.7) 59% 17% 16% 8% 
Nasal Cannula 5.6 (3.0) 52% 18% 15% 15% 

RESULTS 

Baseline Characteristics 

The baseline characteristics of the 157 children enrolled in 
TuCASA are shown in Table 1. There were 100 children (64%) 
between five to eight years old and 57 children (36%) between 
the ages of 9 to 12. The Hispanic population was well represented 
with 74 children (47%). There were 68 female participants 
(43%) and 89 males (57%). A snoring prevalence of 34% (n=53) 
was found in this sample, and 30% (n=47) of parents reported 
their child had daytime sleepiness of occasionally to almost 
always. Using the standardized data for body mass index reported 
by Rosner et al,20 26 children (17%) exceeded the 95th percentile 
of BMI for gender, ethnicity, and age, and were classified 
as obese. 

Feasibility 

Between February 2000 and March 2001, 162 children underwent 
unattended home polysomnography. Sufficient sleep data 
was collected on 147 subjects, for an initial failure rate of 9% 

(n=15). Six of these 15 failures were due to oximetry <4 hours 
(the oximeter became wet or detached from the finger), five were 
due to equipment failure (such as a disconnected cable or battery 
failure), and on four occasions the child or parent removed the 
monitor prior to completion of at least four hours of sleep (child 
refused to sleep with equipment). Of the initial failures, nine out 
of ten children had a successful second study with the only failure 
due to oximetry <4 hours. This subject had a third study completed, 
which was successful. The overall number of successful 
sleep studies was 157 out of 162 children attempted, for an overall 
failure rate of 3%. 

Study Quality and Recording Times 

Study quality grades and length of scorable signal for the 157 
studies are shown in Table 2. Overall, there were 61% (n=95) 
studies of excellent quality, 36% (n=57) studies of good quality 
and 3% (n=5) of these studies were of fair quality. The highest 
quality signals were found on respiratory bands and EOG, and the 
lowest quality signals were found on chin EMG and airflow 
channels. There were no trends in signal quality over the course 
of data collection. The mean recording time was 569 minutes 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 940 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


Table 3—Equipment discomfort 

None Very Little Moderate A great deal 

Vest 60% 30% 7% 3% 
Oximeter 59% 27% 10% 4% 
Respiratory 
Bands 56% 29% 11% 4% 
ECG 53% 30% 15% 2% 
EEG 53% 31% 14% 2% 
EOG 42% 30% 21% 7% 
Thermister/ 
Cannula 35% 31% 17% 17% 


Table 4—Distribution of RDI 

RDI NMean SD % 

0 - 4.9 65 2.87 .81 41.4 

5 - 9.9 72 5.35 .83 45.9 
10 - 14.9 14 8.06 .85 8.9 
15 - 19.9 4 11.07 1.35 2.5 

> 20 2 29.52 22.04 1.3 

RDI = number of respiratory events (apneas and hypopneas) per hour of 
the total sleep time 

(range 324–740), with a mean sleep period of 512 minutes (range 
301–662.5), and mean sleep efficiency of 89.4% (range 
72.8%–97.2%). 

Participant Burden 

A short questionnaire completed by parents on the morning 
after the sleep study ascertained that 54% of subjects slept as well 
as or better than usual, 40% of the parents said that their child 
slept somewhat worse than usual, and 6% slept much worse than 
usual. The thermister/nasal cannula combination was the sensor 
which received the most complaint of discomfort with 34% of 
parents reporting that their child had a moderate to a great deal of 
discomfort (Table 3). Other sensors which caused at least moderate 
discomfort were the EOG electrodes (28%) and the EEG 
electrodes (17%). The respiratory bands, vest, and oximeter 
received very few discomfort complaints. Of all subjects, 24% 
(n=37) of parents reported that their child had difficulty falling 
asleep on the night of the study. 

Respiratory Disturbance Index 

The distribution of RDI calculated from events scored without 
visualization of the nasal pressure signal is skewed towards lower 
RDI values (Table 4). Most events were hypopneic, and little 
oxygen desaturation was noted in most participants. The overall 
mean RDI value was 6.6 with a standard deviation of 6.6 and a 
range from 0.6 to 72.4 events per hour (this high value was confirmed 
by laboratory polysomnography). An RDI of > 10 was 
found in 12.7% (n=20) of children. 

The third pass of polysomnogram scoring included nasal pressure 
in conjunction with other respiratory signals to detect more 
subtle changes in upper airway resistance. In general, more 

events were detected when using the nasal pressure signal. Out 
of 157 children studied, 66% (n=103) had a nasal pressure signal 
of sufficient duration and quality to assist in scoring. Using this 
signal, the mean overall RDI increased to 7.8 with a standard 
deviation of 6.9 and range of 2 to 69.2 (p<.001 vs RDI without 
nasal pressure cannula). An RDI>10 now was found in 18% 
(n=18) of children. 

Night to Night Variability 

Of the 12 children who were asked to undergo a second night 
of polysomnography, one of the studies failed due to equipment 
malfunction (main cable disconnect), and one study failed 
because there was less than four hours of oximetry (loose oximeter). 
Of the ten remaining studies, six were of excellent quality, 
three were of good quality, and one was fair. The mean time 
between the two recordings was 23.8 days, with a range of 7 to 
50 days. Sufficient nasal pressure signal to accurately score 
upper-airway events was available in eight of the ten studies. 

The RDI calculated without use of the nasal pressure signal 
was not statistically significantly different between the two studies 
(p>.79). The mean RDI for the first study was 4.4±1.6 (SD); 
for the second study the mean RDI was 4.3±1.8. Total mean 
sleep time was 530±69 and 507±76 minutes, respectively 
(p>.65). Sleep efficiency was 90% on the first night of study and 
89% on the second night (p>.51). Using RDI as the comparison 
measure between the two nights of study, a Bland Altman plot 
(Figure 1) shows good agreement between the two separate 
nights of study with a mean difference of 1.16. Similar analyses 
using the RDI calculated with the nasal pressure signal showed 
no significant difference between the first and second nights of 
study (p>.62). 

Comparison to Laboratory Polysomnography 

In the five children who were asked to complete a polysomnogram 
in the University of Arizona Sleep Disorders Center, one 
child had the clinical study done first and four children completed 
the home study first. In these five children, there was no statistically 
significant difference in RDI between the two methods 
(p>.13). The sleep architecture between the lab and home studies 
showed consistently similar results in these children. 

DISCUSSION 

The TuCASA study demonstrates that high quality unattended 
multi-channel polysomnography can be performed on children 
aged 5—12 years in a research protocol with a high rate of success. 
Moreover, parental assessment indicates that the monitoring 
equipment had only a small effect on sleep quality in the majority 
of children studied. Although addition of a nasal pressure cannula 
identified a slightly greater number of SDB events, it was 
associated with a higher failure rate. Repeat studies showed little 
night to night variability. Furthermore, unattended polysomnography 
using this protocol compared favorably to attended studies 
in a sleep laboratory. 

In TuCASA, we performed unattended polysomnography in 
the home and acquired high quality sleep data in children with a 
>90% success rate. There have been several previous reports of 
home sleep recordings in children; however, none have used full 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 941 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Average of HoRDI1 and HORDI2 
Difference Between HoRDI1 and HORDI2 
mean difference 
mean difference plus and minu 1.96 times the standard deviation of the differences (0.89) 
+1.96 (SD) 
2.19 
Mean 
1.16 
-1.96 (SD) 
0.126 
Figure 1—Bland-Altman plot of RDI night-to-night variability. HoRDI1=RDI on first night of polysomnography. HoRDI2=RDI on second night of polysomnography. 
N=10. 

polysomnography.21,22 Most of these studies have monitored a 
limited number of respiratory channels using a variety of sensors 
to record airflow, thoracic and abdominal movement, and oxygen 
saturation. To better define sleep, video camera monitoring, in 
conjunction with partial polysomnography, has also been proposed.
23 Although SDB can be assessed with a reasonable degree 
of certainty with such methods, accurate measurement of the 
amount and quality of sleep is not possible. The full neurocognitive 
impact of SDB in children may require an assessment of the 
quantity and quality of sleep, especially in those without severe 
disease. Such recordings can be obtained in a sleep laboratory 
with attended polysomnography; however, the cost of recording 
a large number of children would be quite expensive, and the burden 
on families could be significant. Therefore, for clinical 
research, the capability to perform full unattended polysomnography 
in the home is essential to understand the neurocognitive 
impact of SDB in children. 

We found that the polysomnogram montage used in our study 
has only a modest impact on parental assessment of sleep quality. 
The majority of children slept as well as, or better than, usual 
and only a small number slept poorly. The primary sensor causing 
discomfort was the combination thermister/cannula, which 
consists of a pediatric oxygen nasal cannula with a three-pronged 
thermister laying on its top surface. This finding is consistent 
with our observation that both airflow sensors also had the highest 
rates of signal duration less than four hours. The level of participant 
burden in TuCASA children is very similar to that found 
in the Sleep Heart Health Study (a large cohort study using unattended 
polysomnography in over 6,000 adults), with 30% of 
those adults having a moderate to great deal of discomfort caused 
by the thermister alone.15 

When using nasal pressure to assist in the identification of 
hypopneas, we observed a higher RDI (or SDBI) than with only 
the thermister as an airflow signal. In adults, recording of nasal 
pressure has been advocated as a method of detecting subtle periodic 
elevations in upper airway resistance that is less invasive 
than esophageal manometry.24 These events frequently are associated 
with microarousals from sleep and may have the same 
clinical impact as frank hypopneas and apneas.25 Unfortunately, 
the nasal pressure signal had an even higher failure rate than the 
thermister. The explanation for this finding is unclear. However, 
because both sensors tend to cause some irritation in many of the 
children, we believe that the children tend to inadvertently 
manipulate them after the sleep recording has started. We speculate 
that the signal derived from the nasal pressure cannula is 
more position sensitive than the signal from the thermister resulting 
in greater signal loss when inadvertently moved. Thus, our 
data suggest that the nasal pressure cannula should not be used by 
itself as a marker of airflow during unattended polysomnography 
in children. Additionally, it is uncertain whether unattended 
polysomnography would be feasible in the pre-school age group 
as signal quality decreased in the younger children in our study. 

In a limited sample of children, we found that the results from 
a second unattended polysomnogram were comparable to the 
first night of recording. There have been several studies of nightto-
night variability in adults performed using laboratory 
polysomnography.26-30 In general, the RDI on one night is comparable 
to another, although variability may be slightly greater 
when the RDI is low.26,30 No studies of night to night variability 
have been performed using unattended polysomnography in children. 
However, our findings are comparable to a larger study performed 
in adults as part of the Sleep Heart Health Study in which 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 942 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


night-to-night variation also was small.31 

A potential problem of laboratory polysomnography in young 
children is the inability to sleep well in an unfamiliar environment, 
surrounded by strangers and monitoring equipment. By 
recording sleep in the familiar home setting, children should be 
less apprehensive and have a more normal night of sleep. While 
we did not perform an extensive comparison of home to laboratory 
polysomnography (n=5), we obtained reasonably similar 
data in these participants. These statistical similarities are 
accepted with the limitations normally found in samples of such 
small size. Although we cannot infer that our home recordings 
were more representative of a child’s sleep than recordings performed 
in a laboratory, they appear to be at least comparable. 

A potential limitation of our findings is the exclusion of end-
tidal PCO2 or TcPCO2 as part of our TuCASA recording montage. 
Use of end-tidal PCO2 or TcPCO2 has been recommended in children 
for detecting obstructive hypoventilation.32-34 
Unfortunately, it is not feasible to perform either end-tidal PCO2 
or TcPCO2 measurements in the home environment. However, 
subtle changes in flow limitation indicative of increased upper 
airway resistance can be identified by the use of pressure changes 
measured with a nasal cannula.18,25 We believe that it is possible 
to identify episodes of obstructive hypoventilation using this signal, 
although we have no confirmatory data. Furthermore, it is 
likely that episodes of hypoventilation become less prevalent in 
older preadolescents, which comprise 35% of our cohort. 

Another possible limitation of our study is the potential for 
selection bias. If parents of children with a sleep problem preferentially 
returned the screening questionnaire, a greater number of 
participants with a high RDI would have been studied. 
Unfortunately, this bias may be present in any prospective cohort 
study. 

In conclusion, the TuCASA study has demonstrated the feasibility 
of collecting high quality unattended multi-channel 
polysomnography in children ages 5 to 12 years. Participant 
burden has been acceptable in the majority of children and has 
had only a modest effect on subjective sleep quality. Therefore, 
the polysomnographic recording techniques that we have outlined 
should prove useful in our current and other future epidemiological 
studies of sleep in children. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors thank Charles Wynstra and Martin Ukockis, 
R.PSG.T., RRT, for their assistance in data collection and 
polysomnogram scoring. The authors also wish to thank Albert 
Gould PhD, Chair, Research Committee, and the principals, 
teachers, parents, and students from the Tucson Unified School 
District for their ongoing support of this research. 

REFERENCES 

1. Gaultier C. Clinical and therapeutic aspects of obstructive sleep 
apnea syndrome in infants and children. Sleep 1992;15:S36-38. 
2. Guilleminault C. Obstructive sleep apnea. Medical Clinics of North 
America 1985;69:1187-1203. 
3. Guilleminault C. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome in Children. In: 
Guilleminault C, ed. Sleep and its disorders in children. New York: 
Raven, 1987:213-224. 
4. Carroll J LG. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in infants and children: 
clinical features and pathophysiology. In: Kryger, Roth, & Dement 
ed. Principles and practice of sleep medicine in the child. Philadelphia, 
PA: W.B. Saunders, 1995:163-191. 

5. Gozal D. Sleep-Disordered Breathing and School Performance in 
Children. Pediatr 1998;102:616-620. 
6. Owens J, Opipari L, Nobile C, Spirito A. Sleep and daytime behavior 
in children with obstructive sleep apnea and behavioral sleep disorders. 
Pediatrics 1998;102:1178-1184. 
7. Hansen DE, Vandenberg B. Neuropsychological features and differential 
diagnosis of sleep apnea syndrome in children. J Clin Child Psych 
1997;26:304-310. 
8. Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Skatrud J, Weber S, Badr S. The 
occurrence of sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged adults. N 
Engl J Med 1993;328:1230-5. 
9. Guilleminault C, Stoohs R, Clerk A, Cetel M, Maistros P. A cause of 
excessive daytime sleepiness. The upper airway resistance syndrome. 
Chest 1993;104:781-7. 
10.Exar EN, Collop NA. The upper airway resistance syndrome. Chest 
1999;115:1127-39. 
11. Gould GA, Whyte KF, Rhind GB, et al. The sleep hypopnea syndrome. 
Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;137:895-8. 
12.Guilleminault C, Pelayo R, Leger D, Clerk A, Bocian RCZ. 
Recognition of sleep-disordered breathing in children. Pediatr 
1996;98:871-82. 
13.Downey R III PR, MacQuarrie J. Upper airway resistance syndrome: 
Sick, symptomatic but underrecognized. Sleep 1993;16:620-623. 
14.Marcus CI, Omlin KJ, Basinki DJ, et al. Normal polysomnographic 
values for children and adolescents. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:12359. 
15.Redline S, Sanders M, Lind B, et al. Methods for obtaining and analyzing 
unattended polysomnography data for a multicenter study. Sleep 
1998;21:759-67. 
16.Rechtschaffen A KA. A manual of standardized terminology: techniques 
and scoring systems for sleep stages of human subjects. UCLA 
Brain Information Service/Brain Research Institute. Los Angeles, CA, 
1968. 
17.EEG arousals: scoring rules and examples: a preliminary report from 
the Sleep Disorders Atlas Task Force of the American Sleep Disorders 
Association. Sleep 1992;15:173-84. 
18.Norman RG, Ahmed MM, Walsleben JA, Rapoport DM. Detection of 
respiratory events during NPSG: nasal cannula/pressure sensor versus 
thermistor. Sleep 1997;20:1175-84. 
19.Bland JM AD. Statistical method for assessing agreement between 
two methods of clinical measurement. Lancet 1986;i:307-310. 
20.Rosner B PR, Loggie J, Daniels S. Percentiles for body mass index 
in U.S. children 5 to 17 years of age. Journal of Pediatrics 1998;132:21122. 
21.Brouillette RT, Jacob SV, Waters KA, Morielli A, Mograss M, 
Ducharme FM. Cardiorespiratory sleep studies for children can often be 
performed in the home. Sleep 1996;10 (Suppl):S278-31. 
22.Jacob SV, Morielli A, Mograss MA, Ducharme FM, Schloss MD, 
Brouillette RT. Home testing for pediatric obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 
secondary to adenotonsillar hypertrophy. Pediatr Pulmonol 
1995;20:241-52. 
23.Morielli A, Ladan S, Ducharme FM, Brouillette RT. Can sleep and 
wakefulness be distinguished in children by cardiorespiratory and videotape 
recordings? Chest 1996;109:680-7. 
24.Ayappa I, Norman RG, Krieger AC, Rosen A, O’Malley RL, 
Rapoport DM. Non-invasive detection of respiratory effort-related 
arousals (RERAs) by a nasal cannula/pressure transducer system. Sleep 
2000;23:763-771. 
25.Hosselet J-J, Ayappa I, Norman RG, Krieger AC, Rapoport DM. 
Classification of sleep-disordered breathing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
2001;163:398-405. 
26.Wittig RM, Romaker A, Zorick FJ, Roehrs TA, Conway WA, Roth T. 
Night-to-night consistency of apneas during sleep. Am Rev Respir Dis 
1984;129:244-6. 
SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 943 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


27.Mendelson WB. Use of the sleep laboratory in suspected sleep apnea 
syndrome: is one night enough? Cleve Clin J Med 1994 61:299-303. 
28.Le Bon O, Hoffmann G, Tecco J, et al. Mild to moderate sleep respiratory 
events: one negative night may not be enough. Chest 
2000;118:353-9. 
29.Chediak AD, Acevedo-Crespo JC, Seiden DJ, Kim HH, Kiel MH. 
Nightly variability in the indices of sleep-disordered breathing in men 
being evaluated for impotence with consecutive night polysomnograms. 
Sleep 1996;19:589-92. 
30.Mosko SS, Dickel MJ, Ashurst J. Night-to-night variability in sleep 
apnea and sleep-related periodic leg movements in the elderly. Sleep 
1988;11:340-8. 
31.Rapoport DM IC, Kiley JP, Nieto FJ, Quan SF, Redline S, Sanders 
M, Young T. Night to night variability in sleep and respiratory data collected 
during NPSG’s as part of the Sleep Heart Health Study. Sleep 
1998; (Suppl): 212. 
32.Morielli A, Desjardins D, Brouillette RT. Transcutaneous and end-
tidal carbon dioxide pressures should be measured during pediatric 
polysomnography. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;16:1599-604. 
33.Smith TC, Proops DW, Pearman K, Hutton P. Nasal capnography in 
children: automated analysis provides a measure of obstructive during 
sleep. Clin Otolaryngol 1993;18:69-71. 
34.Messner AH, Pelayo R. Pediatric sleep-related breathing disorders. 
Am J Otolaryngol 2000;1:98-107. 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BMI—body mass index; ECG—electrocardiogram; EEG— 
electroencephalogram; EMG—electromyogram; EOG—electrooculogram; 
LCD—liquid crystal display; HoRDI1—value of 
RDI on first night of home polysomnography; HoRDI2—value of 
RDI on second night of home polysomnography; NREM—non-
REM sleep; OSAS—obstructive sleep apnea syndrome; PCMCIA—
personal computer memory card international association; 
PCO2—pressure of carbon dioxide; PIB—patient interface box; 
PSG—polysomnogram; REM—rapid eye movement sleep; 
RDI—respiratory disturbance index; SDB—sleep-disordered 
breathing; SDBI—sleep-disordered breathing index; TcPCO2— 
transcutaneous carbon dioxide; TuCASA—Tucson Children’s 
Assessment of Sleep Apnea; TUSD—Tucson Unified School 
District 

SLEEP, Vol. 24, No. 8, 2001 944 Unattended Polysomnography in Children—Goodwin et al 


