BEHAVIORAL SLEEP MEDICINE, 3(1), 4–17 
Copyright © 2005, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Health-Related Quality of Life Among 
Children Presenting to a Pediatric Sleep 
Disorders Clinic 


Chantelle N. Hart 

Department of Child and Family Psychiatry 
Rhode Island Hospital and Brown Medical School 


Tonya M. Palermo 

Department of Anesthesiology and Peri-Operative Medicine 
Oregon Health and Sciences University 


Carol L. Rosen 

Department of Pediatrics 
Case University School of Medicine 


The present study is a retrospective review of a clinical database that assessed the association 
between childhood sleep disturbances and health-related quality of life 
(HRQOL). The sample consists of 80 caretakers of children ages 5 to 18 years referred 
to a pediatric sleep disorders clinic. Caretakers completed the Child Health Questionnaire—
Parent Form (CHQ-PF50) and the Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire 
(CSHQ). Compared toanormative sample, caretakers of children with a sleep disorder 
reported poorer scores on the CHQ-PF50. Caretaker reports of HRQOL did not differ 
across sleep diagnostic groups, and scores on the CSHQ were not associated with 
scores onthe CHQ-PF50. Results suggest that childrenwith sleepdisturbances experience 
a variety of HRQOL decrements that may benefit from intervention. 

Approximately one fourth of all school-aged children and adolescents have sleep 
difficulties (Archbold, Pituch, Panahi, & Chervin, 2002; Ohayon, Roberts, Zulley, 
Smirne, & Priest, 2000; Owens, Spirito, McGuinn, & Nobile, 2000) with an in-

Requests for reprints should be sent to Chantelle Hart, Department of Child and Family Psychiatry, 
Rhode Island Hospital and Brown Medical School, 593 Eddy Street, CORO West, Suite 204, Providence, 
RI 02903. E-mail: chantelle_hart@brown.edu 


HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 

creased prevalence of sleep problems among children who have comorbid developmental 
disorders (i.e., pervasive developmental disorder, mental retardation; 
Richdale, Francis, Gavidia-Payne, & Cotton, 2000; Schreck & Mulick, 2000). 
However, despite their high prevalence, little is known regarding whether sleep 
difficulties are associated with children’s health-related quality of life (HRQOL), 
which can be defined as an individual’s subjective sense of well-being and functioning 
within physical, emotional, and social domains (Jenkins, 1992; Levi & 
Drotar, 1999). HRQOL is important to assess in children with sleep disturbances 
for several reasons, including its potentially influential role in ensuring that children’s 
health care needs are met (Guyatt, 1993; Schor, 1998). Furthermore, measures 
of HRQOL can be used as tools to help parents and providers weigh the risks 
and benefits of treating a particular sleep disturbance such as sleep disordered 
breathing (SDB; de Serres et al., 2002). Finally, the success of a particular treatment 
can be measured by how it impacts children’s HRQOL (i.e., by assessing 
HRQOL both prior to and following treatment) and can inform decisions regarding 
treatment effectiveness (de Serres et al., 2002), which provides a greater rationale 
to third-party payers with respect to the importance of treating sleep disturbances 
in children. 

Although few studies have evaluated the association between sleep problems 
and HRQOL, a number of investigations have found that sleep disturbances are associated 
with impaired daytime functioning. For example, parent report of decreased 
sleep duration in younger children is associated with an increase in parent 
report of behavior problems and the presence of a comorbid psychiatric diagnosis 
(Lavigne et al., 1999). Furthermore, self-reported sleep disturbances in adolescents 
are associated with increased self-report of depressed mood and feeling 
tense, moody, and irritable, as well as feeling less alert and energetic (Kirmil-Gray, 
Eagleston, Gibson, & Thoreson, 1984; Wolfson & Carskadon, 1998). In their survey 
study, Wolfson and Carskadon also found that adolescents with lower grades 
in school (Cs–Fs) reported getting less sleep and going to bed later than adolescents 
who received better grades (As and Bs). 

In addition to the more general sleep complaints, specific sleep diagnoses and 
symptoms such as snoring, SDB, and narcolepsy are also associated with poorer 
daytime functioning. For example, narcolepsy in children and adolescents is associated 
with self-reported feelings of embarrassment and lowered self-worth, 
poorer academic achievement, and avoidant behaviors (i.e., avoiding social situations; 
Broughton & Broughton, 1994). In addition, parent report of children’s 
snoring is associated with daytime attention problems, hyperactivity, daytime 
sleepiness, and lowered memory and intelligence scores (Ali, Pitson, & 
Stradling, 1993; Blunden, Lushington, Kennedy, Martin, & Dawson, 2000; 
Chervin et al., 2002; Chervin, Dillon, Bassetti, Ganoczy, & Pituch, 1997). There 
is also evidence that habitual snoring (i.e., the presence of snoring at baseline 
and 2 years later) increases the likelihood of daytime sleepiness and hyperactiv



HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 

ity in children (Ali, Pitson, & Stradling, 1994) and that comorbid behavioral 
sleep diagnoses (e.g., sleep onset association disorder) heighten the negative impact 
of SDB on children’s daytime behavior problems (Owens, Opipari, Nobile, 
& Spirito, 1998). Given all of the research that suggests that poorer sleep (i.e., 
decreased sleep duration or specific sleep disorders) is associated with decrements 
in daytime functioning, it can be argued that assessing the association of 
sleep difficulties and children’s global functioning (as measured by HRQOL) is 
warranted. 

Thus far, to our knowledge, three investigations have assessed the association 
between HRQOL and sleep difficulties; all of these studies evaluated this association 
within the context of SDB or adenotonsillar disease (de Serres et al., 2002; 
Rosen, Palermo, Larkin, & Redline, 2002; Stewart et al., 2000). Rosen and colleagues 
(2002) found that SDB was associated with parent report of decreased 
overall physical health and increased reports of bodily pain in children. An additional 
investigation found that as compared to a healthy normative sample, parents 
of children with adenotonsillar disease reported poorer perceptions of their children’s 
general health and poorer physical functioning as well as greater physical 
and emotional/behavioral limitations, increased bodily pain, and more behavior 
problems. Furthermore, differences were found between the healthy normative 
sample and children with adenotonsillar disease regarding its impact on parent’s 
emotions and time, family activities, and family functioning with parents of children 
with adenotonsillar disease reporting more difficulties in each HRQOL domain 
(Stewart et al., 2000). And finally, one investigation found that 
adenotonsillectomy produced significant improvements in HRQOL of children 
with SDB (de Serres et al., 2002). 

Other than these few studies that focused on SDB/adenotonsillar disease, to 
our knowledge, no investigations have assessed the association of a broader 
range of childhood sleep difficulties with child and family HRQOL. Specifically, 
no investigations have assessed whether there are any differences in HRQOL for 
children with different sleep diagnoses. Moreover, to our knowledge, no pediatric 
studies have assessed the relationship between a range of specific sleep behaviors 
(e.g., frequent night wakings, parasomnias, snoring) and children’s 
HRQOL. 

On the basis of previous research findings, the aims of the present study were to 
determine the following: (a) whether children coming to a pediatric sleep disorders 
clinic would have poorer HRQOL compared to a normative sample of children; (b) 
whether there are any differences in HRQOL in children with either a behavioral 
sleep diagnosis (e.g., sleep onset association disorder), a biological/physiological 
sleep diagnosis (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea; OSA), or a combined sleep diagnosis 
(i.e., those given both a behavioral and a biological/physiological sleep diagnosis); 
and (c) what specific reported sleep behaviors (e.g., SDB, night wakings) are 
associated with HRQOL. 


HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 

METHOD 

Sample 

Participants in the current investigation include a convenience sample of 80 consecutive 
caretakers of children with completed data who came to a pediatric 
sleep disorders clinic at an academic children’s hospital in the Midwest. Between 
January 2000 and June 2002, 152 children 5 to 18 years old came to the 
sleep disorders clinic. Two children were excluded from analysis because the 
caregiver-reported sleep complaint was considered to represent normal behavior. 
Eighty caretakers (53.3%) of children coming to the clinic had completed all 
caretaker report forms and were therefore included in the final analytic sample. 
Caretakers who accompanied the child to the appointment were predominantly 
female (93.8%) and ranged in age from 21 to 63 years (M = 41.2, SD = 7.9). 
Caretakers classified themselves as primarily Caucasian (77.5%), as having at 
least a high school education (96.2%), as working at least part-time (62.5%), and 
as primarily married (68.8%). 

Children in the current investigation were predominantly male (62.5%) and 
Caucasian (75.0%), ranging in age from 5 to 18 years old (M = 11.2, SD = 3.8). 
Fifty-eight percent of the sample had a medical comorbidity (e.g., obesity, pulmonary 
or neurologic diseases). Primary and secondary sleep diagnoses for the sample 
are presented in Table 1. As can be seen in the table, 30 children (37.5%) had a 

TABLE 1 

Primary and Secondary Sleep Diagnoses for Pediatric Sleep Clinic 

Sample 

Primary Sleep Secondary Sleep 
Diagnosisa Diagnosisb 

Variables n % n % 

Behavioral 
Sleep-onset association disorder 6 7.5 1 1.3 
Limit-setting sleep disorder 2 2.5 7 8.8 
Psychophysiological insomnia 6 7.5 1 1.3 
Inadequate sleep hygiene 16 20.0 11 13.8 

Biological/physiological 
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome—sleep disordered breathing 27 33.8 1 1.3 
Narcolepsy 3 3.8 0 0.0 
Restless legs syndrome—periodic limb movement disorder 3 3.8 0 0.0 
Parasomnia 5 6.3 1 1.3 
Delayed sleep-phase syndrome 10 12.5 3 3.8 
Excessive daytime sleepiness 2 2.5 2 2.5 

Note. (N = 80). Fifty-three pediatric patients (66.3%) did not have a secondary sleep diagnosis. 
a(N = 80). b(n = 27). 


HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 

primary behavioral sleep diagnosis, and 50 children (62.5%) had a primary biological/
physiological diagnosis. Twenty-seven children (33.8%) were also diagnosed 
with a secondary sleep disorder. For analytic purposes, sleep diagnoses were 
coded into three categories: behavioral sleep disorders, biological/physiological 
sleep disorders, and combined (i.e., a child assigned both a behavioral and a biological 
sleep diagnosis). Table 2 presents characteristics of each of the three sleep 
diagnostic groups. As can be seen in the table, groups were comparable across 
child’s gender, age, and medical comorbidity. They differed on child’s racial category 
with the combined and behavioral sleep groups consisting of more Caucasian 
children than the biological/physiological group. Diagnostic groups were similar 
across parental education and marital status. 

Normative sample. Children within the present study were compared to a 
normative sample on the Child Health Questionnaire—Parent Form 
(CHQ-PF50; see later description of measure) in order to compare HRQOL between 
children with sleep problems and a healthy comparison group. As described 
in the manual for the CHQ-PF50, this normative sample is representative 
of the general U.S. population on age, sex, and ethnicity (Landgraf, Abetz, & 
Ware, 1996). The normative sample of children (N = 391) was predominantly 
male (54.5%) and Caucasian (83.5%), ranging in age from 5 to 18 years old (M 
= 11.5, SD = 3.7; Landgraf et al., 1996). Seventeen percent of the sample had a 
medical comorbidity (e.g., asthma, epilepsy, orthopaedic problem). Normative 
data for the CHQ-PF50 were gathered as part of the National Survey of Functional 
Health Status, which was a cross-sectional survey that included the 
CHQ-PF50. More detailed information regarding the sampling strategy can be 
found within the manual (Landgraf et al., 1996). 

TABLE 2 
Characteristics of the Pediatric Sleep Diagnostic Groups 


Behavioral Biological Combined 
Groupa Groupb Groupc 
Characteristic n % n % n % 
Male gender 13 50 27 73.0 10 58.8 
Caucasian race 21 80.8 23 62.2 16 94.1* 
Age: M (SD) 10.7 (3.7) 11.5 (4.1) 11.5 (3.5) 
Medical comorbidity 13 50.0 23 62.2 11 64.7 
Married caretakers 17 65.4 25 67.6 13 76.5 
Caretakers who completed college 14 53.8 17 45.9 7 41.2 

a(n = 26). b(n = 37). c(n = 17). 
*p < .05. 


HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 

Measures 

Demographic variables. General demographic variables were gathered at 
intake, including child’s age, gender, ethnicity, and medical comorbidity. Caretaker 
demographic data were also collected, including caretaker age, gender, ethnicity, 
marital status, education, and employment status. 

HRQOL. HRQOL was assessed with the CHQ-PF50, a widely used parent report 
measure of children’s physical, emotional, and social functional status and 
well-being (Landgraf et al., 1996). The CHQ-PF50 consists of 50 items and 12 
subscales as well as two summary scores for physical and psychosocial health. 
Subscale scores are scaled from 0 (worst health) to 100 (best health); summary 
scores are computed from differentially weighted subscale scores and are transformedintot 
scoreswithameanof50.Extensivedataregardingthedevelopment,reliability, 
and validity of the measure for boys and girls of different ages and cultures 
and with parents of differing levels of education and marital and work status are 
available in the manual (Landgraf et al., 1996). Previous studies have demonstrated 
goodinternalconsistencyforthephysicalandpsychosocialsummaryscores(a 
=.84 
to .97) in normativeandchronicillnesssamples;thealpha forsubscalescoresranged 
from.56to.98inbothsamples(Landgrafetal.,1996).TheCHQ-PF50hasalsodemonstrated 
good concurrent, convergent, and discriminant validity (Landgraf et al., 
1996). Within the present sample, the internal consistency (alpha) for the physical 
and psychosocial summary scores was .83. Internal consistencies (alphas) for the 
subscale scores in the present sample were as follows: Physical Functioning, .76; 
Role/Social Limitations—Emotional Behavior, .94; Role/Social Limitations—
Physical Functioning, .95; Bodily Pain, .91; Behavior, .74; Mental Health, 
.81; Self Esteem, .87; General Health, .67; Parental Impact—Emotional, .60; Parental 
Impact—Time, .67; and Family Activities, .91. The family cohesion subscale is a 
one-item scale, so internal consistency could not be estimated. 

Sleep disturbances. The Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ) is 
a 45-item, retrospective, parent-report measure designed to examine the sleep behaviors 
of school-aged children (Owens, Spirito, & McGuinn, 2000). It yields a total 
score and eight conceptually grouped subscale scores, including bedtime resistance, 
sleep onset delay, sleep duration, sleep anxiety, night wakings, parasomnias, 
SDB, and daytime sleepiness. Parents rate the frequency of sleep behaviors for a 
“typical” week on a 3-point scale: “usually” (5–7 times per week), “sometimes” 
(2–4 times per week), or “rarely” (0–1 times per week). Higher scores on the measure 
indicate greater sleep disturbance. The total score and subscale scores for the 
CSHQ demonstrated adequate internal consistency in a sleep clinic sample (a 
= 
.78 for total score; a 
= .56 to .93 for subscales). Test–retest reliability for the 
CSHQ subscales (i.e., Pearson’s correlations and Spearman’s rank order correla



10 HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 

tions) ranged from .62 to .79 in a community sample. Validity of the CSHQ was 
supported by the instrument’s ability to differentiate between a clinical and community 
sample and by the significantly higher scores of children with behavioral, 
parasomnia, and SDB diagnoses on their respective subscales on the CSHQ (i.e., 
the behavioral group scored higher than the parasomnia or SDB groups on the bedtime 
resistance subscale). Internal consistency (alpha) in the present study for the 
total sleep disturbance score was .68. Internal consistencies (alphas) for the 
subscale scores in the present sample were as follows: bedtime resistance, .78; 
sleep duration, .72; sleep anxiety, .68; night wakings, .58; parasomnias, .60; SDB, 
.81; and daytime sleepiness, .63. 

Sleep diagnosis. A multidisciplinary sleep clinic staff evaluated children 
and made primary and secondary sleep diagnoses using the revised International 
Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) criteria (American Sleep Disorders Association, 
1996). Diagnoses of OSA were confirmed by polysomnography. Four 
children who came to the sleep clinic with excessive daytime sleepiness did not 
meet full ICSD criteria for their primary (n = 2) or secondary (n = 2) sleep diagnosis, 
although treatment was provided. Thus, it should be noted that the current sample 
consists of both clinical and subclinical cases. 

Procedure 

The present study is a retrospective review of a clinical database that included routine 
clinical screening data, the CHQ-PF50 and the CSHQ. Prior to the initial sleep 
clinic visit, caretakers were asked to complete a series of questionnaires including 
the CSHQ, the CHQ-PF50, questions about general health, and a sleep diary. Upon 
arrival at the sleep clinic, the questionnaires were reviewed and caretakers and 
children were interviewed and assessed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a 
pediatric pulmonologist/sleep medicine specialist and a pediatric psychologist, as 
well as trainees and fellows in behavioral pediatrics and psychology. If a child was 
suspected of having a diagnosis of OSA, referral was made for an overnight sleep 
study to confirm the diagnosis. This study proposal underwent an expedited review 
process from the Institutional Review Board, it was considered exempt from a full 
review, and parent consent was waived because it was a retrospective review of 
pre-existing de-identified clinical data collected from adults. 

Data Analysis 

All statistical analyses were run using the Statistical Software Package for the Social 
Sciences (SPSS), 10th edition. Analysis of variance (ANOVA), phi tests, and 
eta tests were used to compare sleep diagnostic groups across demographic variables. 
One-sample t tests were used to compare the sleep clinic sample to pub



HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 11 

lished normative values for the validation sample of the CHQ-PF50. Separate 
ANOVAs were conducted to determine whether sleep diagnostic groups differed 
on the subscale summary scores of the CHQ-PF50. Bivariate correlations 
(Spearman’s correlation coefficient for the Sleep Onset Delay Subscale and 
Pearson’s product–moment correlation coefficient for the remaining subscales of 
the CSHQ) were calculated to assess the relationship between specific sleep behaviors 
(i.e., CSHQ subscales) and children’s HRQOL (i.e., the psychosocial and 
physical summary scores on the CHQ-PF50). 

Except for the analyses comparing sleep diagnostic groups across demographic 
variables (p < .05 was used to determine statistical significance), separate 
ANOVAs (rather than multivariate ANOVA) with a Bonferroni-based correction 
were chosen for analyses, based on recommendations by Jaccard and 
Guilamo-Ramos (2002). Bonferroni-based corrections were used within each 
hypothesis and were computed as follows (Jaccard & Guilamo-Ramos, 2002). 
Within each set of analyses for a given hypothesis, probability values for each 
contrast were obtained and ranked from smallest to largest. The smallest probability 
value was evaluated against an alpha level of .05/k (where k equals the total 
number of comparisons made to test a given hypothesis). The next smallest 
probability value was evaluated against an alpha value of .05/ (k -1) and so on 
until the final analysis was evaluated against an alpha value of .05. However, 
once a statistically nonsignificant value was observed, all remaining comparisons 
were considered nonsignificant (Jaccard & Guilamo-Ramos, 2002). 

In the present study the following significance levels were used as the starting 
probabilityvaluesfordeterminingsignificancewithineachgroupofanalyses.ComparisonofthesleepclinicsampletothepublishednormsontheCHQ-
PF50, p<.004; 
comparison between sleep diagnostic groups on the CHQ-PF50, p < .004; association 
oftheCSHQsubscaleswith CHQ-PF50 subscaleandsummary scores, p <.003; 
and comparison of children with and without medical comorbidities, p < .004. 

RESULTS 

Comparison of the Clinical Sample to Published Normative 
Values on the CHQ-PF50 

Scores for the sleep clinic sample were compared using one-sample t tests to the 
published national norms for healthy children on the CHQ-PF50 (see Table 3). The 
sleep clinic sample scored significantly lower than the published norms on all 
subscales and summary scores, except for the family cohesion subscale. The largest 
effects were found when comparing the sleep clinic and normative samples on 
the parent impact—emotional subscale (d = 1.50), the family activities subscale (d 
= 1.00), and the psychosocial summary score (d = 0.96). All remaining significant 
comparisons had moderate effect sizes (d = 0.43 to 0.75). 


12 HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 
TABLE 3 
Means and Standard Deviations for the Sleep Clinic Sample and the 
Published Normative Values for the Child Health Questionnaire—Parent 
Form Subscale and Summary Scores 
Sleep Clinic Samplea Published Normative Valuesb 
Measure M SD M SD d 
Physical Functioning 83.2 21.3* 96.1 13.9 0.61 
Role/Social–Physical 79.6 32.2* 93.6 18.6 0.43 
General Health Perceptions 58.4 23.1* 73.0 17.3 0.63 
Bodily Pain 68.0 29.1* 81.7 19.0 0.47 
Family Activities 63.5 26.3* 89.7 18.6 1.00 
Role/Social–Emotional/Behavioral 68.4 34.9* 92.5 18.6 0.69 
Parental Impact—Time 69.3 27.6* 87.8 19.9 0.67 
Parental Impact—Emotional 45.2 23.4* 80.3 19.1 1.50 
Self Esteem 67.0 22.5* 79.8 17.5 0.57 
Mental Health 68.5 15.8* 78.5 13.2 0.63 
Behavior 59.7 21.3* 75.6 16.7 0.75 
Family Cohesion 65.7 27.0 72.3 21.6 0.24 
Physical Summary 44.2 13.2* 53.0 8.8 0.67 
Psychosocial Summary 39.9 11.8* 51.2 9.1 0.96 

a(n = 80). b(n = 391). 
*p < .001. 


Comparison of the Sleep Diagnostic Groups on the 
CHQ-PF50 

Results of the analyses of covariance (controlling child race) showed that the three 
sleep diagnostic groups (i.e., behavioral, biological/physiological, and combined) 
did not differ on the CHQ-PF50 subscales. 

Association Between Parent-Reported Sleep Behaviors 
and Parent-Reported HRQOL 

Bivariate correlations were calculated to determine the association between specific 
sleep behaviors and the psychosocial and physical summary scores on the 
CHQ-PF50. However, there were no associations between the CSHQ subscales 
and the CHQ-PF50 psychosocial and physical summary scores. 

Comparison of Children With and Without Medical 
Comorbidities on HRQOL 

To further elucidate the association between sleep problems and HRQOL, independent 
samples t tests were conducted to compare children who had both a sleep di



HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 13 

agnosis and a medical comorbidity to children who had only a sleep diagnosis. Results 
showed that children with and without medical comorbidities differed on the 
CHQ-PF50forcaretakerreportofgeneralhealthperceptions(M =50.40, SD =23.02 
vs. M =69.24, SD =18.55),t(76)=3.87, p<.001,andimpactoncaretakers’time(M = 
61.98, SD = 30.57 vs. M = 79.51, SD = 18.74), t(74) = 3.11, p = .003, with caretakers 
of children who also had a medical comorbidity reporting lower scores. 

DISCUSSION 

Findings from the current investigation suggest that children with sleep disorders 
may have poorer HRQOL than healthy children. As compared to published normative 
data, caretakers of children with sleep diagnoses reported significantly poorer 
functioning across HRQOL domains (with the exception of the family cohesion 
subscaleontheCHQ-PF50). Ofparticular interest in thepresentstudywerethelarge 
effects found for the impact on family activities, emotional impact on parents, and 
children’s overall psychosocial functioning with parents of children with sleep disturbances 
reporting much greater decrements in functioning across these domains. 
Given the impact of sleep disturbances on children’s mood and daytime behavior 
(Kirmil-Gray et al., 1984; Lavigne et al., 1999), it is understandable that there would 
be a large effect for children’s psychosocial functioning and thus on the emotional 
impact on parents. The impact on family activities, however, is less clear. It may be 
thatthebroadimpact ofsleepdifficultieson psychosocial functioning alongwith the 
negative daytime consequences of sleep difficulties (i.e., increased daytime sleepiness) 
are associated with decreased time for family activities. 

The negative association between sleep difficulties and HRQOL found in the 
present investigation is consistent with previous studies conducted with children 
with OSA–adenotonsillar disease (de Serres et al., 2002; Rosen et al., 2002; Stewart 
et al., 2000). Specifically, these findings are similar to Stewart and colleagues’ 
(2000) investigation, which found similar discrepancies in HRQOL between children 
with adenotonsillar disease and a healthy normative sample. In addition to the 
similarities between the present investigation and other HRQOL studies of children 
with sleep disturbances, the findings from the present investigation are consistent 
with studies conducted with children with chronic health conditions. For 
example, Friedlander, Larkin, Rosen, Palermo, and Redline (2003) found that 
when compared to a normative weight sample, parents of children with obesity 
were more likely to report decreased overall psychosocial functioning and increased 
emotional impact on parents. What is particularly interesting is that the effects 
found in Friedlander and colleagues’ investigation were small to moderate in 
size as compared to the moderate to large effects found within the present investigation. 
Thus, sleep disturbances may be associated with similar or even greater 
decrements in HRQOL as compared with chronic health conditions. 


14 HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 

Our findings further demonstrate that irrespective of the sleep diagnosis, caretakers 
did not differ in their report of HRQOL scores. This finding is noteworthy 
for two reasons. First, the few pediatric investigations that have assessed the relationship 
between sleep difficulties and HRQOL focused on SDB (de Serres et al., 
2002; Rosen et al., 2002; Stewart et al., 2000). Thus, this study is the first to show 
that caretakers of children with a wide range of sleep diagnoses provide similar reports 
of their children’s HRQOL. It also supports the need to evaluate HRQOL regardless 
of etiology of the sleep problem. Second, findings also suggest that rather 
than having a specific impact on one area of HRQOL (e.g., physical health), sleep 
difficulties may broadly impact children’s social, emotional, and physical functioning. 
This finding is interesting given that one might expect that sleep diagnoses 
would be domain-specific in terms of their association with HRQOL. For example, 
it could be hypothesized that behavioral sleep disturbances would have a greater 
association with behavioral and emotional domains of HRQOL such as family cohesion 
and the emotional impact on caretakers, as these sleep disturbances entail 
considerable involvement of caretakers to help children settle for sleep. 

The fact that no differences were found between sleep diagnostic groups is not 
consistent with a previous investigation that assessed the association between biologically 
based and behaviorally based sleep disorders and daytime functioning. 
Owens and colleagues (1998) found that a comorbid behavioral sleep diagnosis 
heightened the negative association between SDB and daytime behavior problems. 
One potential explanation for this discrepancy may be that whereas Owens and 
colleagues (1998) assessed daytime behavior problems as measured via the 
Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory, the present study evaluated broader constructs 
of functioning as measured by an HRQOL instrument. Thus, the differences found 
may be attributable to the measures used or the domains assessed. 

In addition to sleep diagnoses, the present study evaluated the association between 
specific sleep behaviors as measured by the subscales on the CSHQ and the 
summary scores on the CHQ-PF50. No significant associations were found, despite 
previous findings showing an association between sleep duration and daytime 
functioning (Kirmil-Gray et al., 1984; Lavigne et al., 1999; Wolfson & 
Carskadon, 1998). Perhaps a stronger association between sleep duration and 
HRQOL would have been found if more accurate measures of sleep duration (e.g., 
actigraphy) were gathered. It is also possible that the summary scores on the 
CHQ-PF50 were too global to capture any specific impact that sleep behaviors 
have on functioning (e.g., impact on mood). 

Additional analyses were conducted to compare children with a sleep diagnosis 
who did and did not have a comorbid medical condition on HRQOL. Results 
showed that caretakers of children with medical comorbidities reported poorer 
HRQOL in terms of parents’ perceptions of their children’s health and limitations 
in time available for parents’ personal needs due to their children’s health. These 
findings confirm clinical experience and previous research with children with 


HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 15 

medical conditions in which the additional health limitations may increase time required 
of caretakers to help in the management of the chronic medical condition 
(e.g., Drotar & Ievers, 1994; Kuhthau et al., 1998). 

Findings from this investigation should be considered in light of some limitations. 
First, sleep behaviors were assessed using a caregiver report measure (CSHQ) 
rather than an objective measure of children’s sleep. Polysomnography may be a 
more objective assessment of children’s true sleep architecture (i.e., quality of sleep 
as measured by both fragmentation of sleep and the distribution of sleep across sleep 
stages), which may more accurately explain what specific sleep behaviors are related 
to children’s HRQOL. Furthermore, the present investigation did not include 
information regarding severity or duration of children’s sleep problems, which may 
shed some light on why sleep problems are negatively impacting HRQOL. Thus, future 
investigations would benefit from more detailed information regarding children’s 
sleep disturbances, including the length of time that the sleep difficulties have 
been present as well as how severe the sleep difficulties are. Future investigations 
would also be strengthened by the use of a local control group rather than comparing 
children with sleep difficulties to published national normative data. 

In addition to limitations in how sleep was measured, it should be noted that the 
CHQ-PF50 measures caregivers’ perceptions of children’s HRQOL, rather than 
child-reported HRQOL. To obtain a more comprehensive picture of children’s 
HRQOL, future investigations would benefit from the use of multiple informants. 

Finally, there are some limitations in terms of the sample’s characteristics. 
The present sample is a relatively small convenience sample (N = 80) of families 
who were referred to a pediatric sleep disorders clinic, which was limited further 
by incomplete data decreasing the sample size and power for certain analyses. 
Given that caretakers were referred to the clinic and that the sample is relatively 
small and homogeneous, generalizability of the present findings to other populations 
(i.e., more diverse community samples) may be limited. Furthermore, 
given that caretakers were coming to a sleep disorders clinic for help with managing 
their child’s sleep disturbance, caretakers may have been biased in their 
reporting of children’s HRQOL in that they may have been more inclined to report 
greater decrements in functioning. 

Despite the aforementioned limitations, the present investigation, to our knowledge, 
is the first to explore the relationship between sleep and HRQOL across 
sleep diagnoses. Furthermore, the present investigation delineated the association 
between sleep disorders and HRQOL in a clinical sample as compared to a normative 
sample of children and demonstrated that regardless of behavioral or biological 
bases, caretakers of children with sleep disorders report similar HRQOL. 

Taken together, these findings have several clinical implications. First, they 
highlight the need for routine assessment of HRQOL in all children presenting to a 
pediatric sleep disorders clinic. Data suggest that children with sleep difficulties 
may be at heightened risk for limitations in daily functioning and HRQOL across 


16 HART, PALERMO, ROSEN 

psychosocial and physical domains. Of particular importance may be the association 
of sleep difficulties with children’s psychosocial functioning as well as the potential 
impact of sleep disturbances on parents’ emotional well-being. Second, 
findings from the present investigation support the importance of having a 
multidisciplinary sleep team available to address potential physical and 
psychosocial limitations. Although sleep difficulties can be conceptualized as primarily 
either biologically or behaviorally based, their association with daytime 
functioning seems to cut across psychosocial and physical domains. 

REFERENCES 

Ali, N. J., Pitson, D., & Stradling, J. R. (1993). Snoring, sleep disturbance, and behaviour in 4–5 year 
olds. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 68, 360–366. 
Ali, N. J., Pitson, D., & Stradling, J. R. (1994). Natural history of snoring and related behaviour problems 
between the ages of 4 and 7 years. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 71, 74–76. 

American Sleep Disorders Association. (1996). ICSD-International Classification of Sleep Disorders, 
revised: Diagnostic and coding manual. Rochester, MN: American Sleep Disorders Association. 
Archbold, K. H., Pituch, K. J., Panahi, P., & Chervin, R. D. (2002). Symptoms of sleep disturbances 

among children at two general pediatric clinics. Journal of Pediatrics, 104, 97–102. 

Blunden, S., Lushington, K., Kennedy, D., Martin, J., & Dawson, D. (2000). Behavior and 
neurocognitive performance in children aged 5–10 years who snore compared to controls. Journal of 
Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 22, 554–568. 

Broughton, W. A. & Broughton, R. J. (1994). Psychosocial impact of narcolepsy. Sleep, 17, S45–S49. 

Chervin, R. D., Archbold, K. H., Dillon, J. E., Panahi, P., Pituch, K. J., Dahl, R. E., & Guilleminault, C. 
(2002). Inattention, hyperactivity, and symptoms of sleep-disordered breathing. Pediatrics, 109, 
449–456. 

Chervin, R. D., Dillon, J. E., Bassetti, C., Ganoczy, D. A., & Pituch, K. J. (1997). Symptoms of sleep 
disorders, inattention, and hyperactivity in children. Sleep, 20, 1185–1192. 

de Serres, L. M., Derkay, C., Sie, K., Biavati, M., Jones, J., Tunkel, D., et al. (2002). Impact of 
adenotonsillectomy on quality of life in children with obstructive sleep disorders. Archives of Otolaryngology 
Head and Neck Surgery, 128, 489–496. 

Drotar, D., & Ievers, C. (1994). Preliminary report: Age differences in parent and child responsibilities 
for management of cystic fibrosis and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Journal of Developmental 
and Behavioral Pediatrics, 15, 367–374. 

Friedlander, S. L., Larkin, E. K., Rosen, C. L., Palermo, T. M., & Redline, S. (2003). Decreased quality 
of life is associated with obesity in school-aged children. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 
157, 1206–1211. 

Guyatt, G. H. (1993). The philosophy of health-related quality of life translation. Quality of Life Research, 
2, 461–465. 

Jaccard, J., & Guilamo-Ramos, V. (2002). Analysis of variance frameworks in clinical child and adolescent 
psychology: Issues and recommendations. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
31, 130–146. 

Jenkins, C. D. (1992). Assessment of outcomes of health intervention. Social Science and Medicine, 
35, 367–375. 

Kirmil-Gray, K., Eagleston, J. R., Gibson, E., & Thoreson, C. E. (1984). Sleep disturbance in adolescence: 
Sleep quality, sleep habits, beliefs about sleep, and daytime functioning. Journal of Youth and 
Adolescence, 13, 375–384. 


HEALTH-RELATED QUALITY OF LIFE 17 

Kuhthau, K., Walker, D. K., Perrin, J. M., Bauman, L., Gortmaker, S. L., Newacheck, P. W., & Stein, R. 

E. K. (1998). Assessing managed care for children with chronic conditions. Health Affairs, 17, 
42–52. 
Landgraf, J. M., Abetz, L., & Ware, J. E. (1996). Child Health Questionnaire (CHQ): A user’s manual. 
Boston: The Health Institute, New England Medical Center. 
Lavigne, J. V., Arend, R., Rosenbaum, D., Smith, A., Weissbluth, M., Binns, H. J., & Christoffel, K. K. 
(1999). Sleep and behavior problems among preschoolers. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral 
Pediatrics, 20, 164–169. 

Levi, R. B., & Drotar, D. (1999). Health-related quality of life in childhood cancer: Discrepancy in parent–
child reports. International Journal of Cancer, 12, 58–64. 

Ohayon, M. M., Roberts, R. E., Zulley, J., Smirne, S., & Priest, R.G. (2000). Prevalence and patterns of 
problematic sleep among older adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 39, 1549–1556. 

Owens, J. A., Opipari, L., Nobile, C., & Spirito, A. (1998). Sleep and daytime behavior in children with 
obstructive sleep apnea and behavioral sleep disorders. Pediatrics, 102, 1178–1184. 

Owens, J. A., Spirito, A., & McGuinn, M. (2000). The Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ): 
Psychometric properties of a survey instrument for school-aged children. Sleep, 23, 1043–1051. 
Owens, J. A., Spirito, A., McGuinn, M., & Nobile, C. (2000). Sleep habits and sleep disturbance in ele


mentary school-age children. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 21, 27–36. 

Richdale, A., Francis, A., Gavidia-Payne, S., & Cotton, S. (2000). Stress, behaviour, and sleep problems 
in children with an intellectual disability. Journal of Intellectual & Developmental Disability, 
25, 147–161. 

Rosen, C. L., Palermo, T. M., Larkin, E. K., & Redline, S. (2002). Health-related quality of life and 
sleep disordered breathing in children. Sleep, 25, 648–654. 

Schor, E. L. (1998). Children’s health and the assessment of health-related quality of life. In D. Drotar 
(Ed.), Measuring health related quality of life in children and adolescents: Implications for research 
and practice (pp. 25–37). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 

Schreck, K. A., & Mulick, J. A. (2000). Parental report of sleep problems in children with autism. Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 127–135. 

Stewart, M. G., Friedman, E. M., Sulek, M., Hulka, G. F., Kuppersmith, R. B., Harrill, W. C., & 
Bautista, M.H. (2000). Quality of life and health status in pediatric tonsil and adenoid disease. Archives 
of Otolaryngology Head Neck Surgery, 126, 45–48. 

Wolfson, A. R., & Carskadon, M. A. (1998). Sleep schedules and daytime functioning in adolescents. 
Child Development, 69, 875–887. 


