J. Paediatr. Child Health (1999) 35, 140–144 
Aetiological factors and development in subjects with 


obstructive sleep apnoea 


JMM HARVEY,1 MJ O’CALLAGHAN,1 PD WALES,2 MA HARRIS1 and IB MASTERS2 

1Department of Developmental and Rehabilitation Services, Mater Children’s Hospital and 2Department of Respiratory 
Medicine, Mater Children’s Hospital, South Brisbane, Queensland, Australia 

Objective: To examine whether maternal pregnancy complications, adverse birth events, respiratory illnesses, or developmental 
difficulty were increased in neurologically normal children with obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and whether severity of 
OSA adversely affects the child’s development and temperament. 
Methodology: Maternal report of perinatal events, respiratory illness and developmental difficulty in 37 children with OSA 
was contrasted with a comparison group (n = 67). Children with OSA were assessed developmentally (Griffiths Scales), had a 
parental rating of temperament (Australian Temperament Scale) and attended an overnight polysomnographic sleep study. 
Results: Children with OSA had an increased prevalence of adverse maternal pregnancy and perinatal events, respiratory 
disease and developmental concerns. Limited associations were found between the severity of OSA and development or 
temperament difficulty. 
Conclusions: This study suggests a relationship between OSA, though not its severity, and pre/perinatal adversity and child 
development. Polysomnographic and detailed developmental assessment of community-based samples of children with OSA 
and control children are necessary to confirm these findings. 

Key words: aetiology; children; development; obstructive sleep apnoea; temperament. 

Approximately 0.7% of children from 4 to 5 years of age experience 
breathing and sleep disturbance associated with obstructive 
sleep apnoea (OSA).1 Adult studies have found that OSA 
and particularly related parameters such as hypoxemia and 
obstructive events are likely to have serious consequences for 
physical, cognitive and behavioural outcome.2,3 The evidence for 
developmental and behavioural consequences of OSA in 
children, however, is limited and is based on studies which often 
describe case series of neurologically impaired children,4 or 
which lack formal developmental testing of the children or 
detailed polysomnographic measures of the disease itself.5–8 
Though it lacked detailed polysomnographic data, the study of Ali 
et al.9 reported a higher prevalence of attentional difficulties in 
children with sleep and breathing disorders, and an improvement 
following adenoidectomy. Population polysomnographic data for 
children and inconsistencies in definitions of disease make interpretation 
of any association between disease and development 
difficult.10 Furthermore, there is a need to assess the association 
between adverse intrapartum events, perinatal events, and 
respiratory related illness with OSA as these may predispose the 
child to both breathing disorders and developmental difficulty.11–13 

In this study we examined whether the prevalence of 
pregnancy complications, perinatal risk factors, respiratory 
illnesses or developmental difficulty were increased in neurologically 
normal children with OSA. We also examined whether the 

Correspondence: JMM Harvey, Department of Developmental and 
Rehabilitation Services, Mater Children’s Hospital, Mater Hill, Brisbane, 
Qld 4101, Australia. Fax: (07) 3840 1744; e-mail: jharvey@mater.org.au 

JMM Harvey, Grad Dip Lib Sci, MEd, Research Officer. MJ O’Callaghan, 
FRACP, MSc, Director of Developmental and Rehabilitative Medicine. 
PD Wales, B. Nsg, Clinical Nurse. MA Harris, FRACP, Respiratory 
Physician. IB Masters, FRACP, Director of Respiratory Medicine. 

Accepted for publication 30 September 1998. 

severity of OSA was associated with the nature or degree of 
disturbance in development and temperament of these children. 

SUBJECTS AND METHODS 

OSA subjects 

Fifty-six children less than 5 years of age were referred to the 
Mater Children’s Respiratory Sleep Clinic during a 12-month 
period for assessment of OSA symptoms. All subjects were 
assessed clinically by a respiratory paediatrician prior to a 
polysomnographic sleep study which was performed within 
4 weeks of the clinical visit. All children had a history of frequent 
snoring for at least 6 months, plus either witnessed apnoea, 
restlessness during sleep or daytime sleepiness. 

Of these 56 children, 40 (28 male, 12 female, mean age 

32.5 months, age range 2–57 months) were considered by a 
paediatrician to be neurologically normal and were the subjects 
for this study. The 16 neurologically abnormal children excluded 
from the study included 2 children with cerebral palsy, 3 children 
with meningomyelocele, 4 children with severe global delay, 
1 child with microcephaly and epilepsy, 2 children with Prader– 
Willi Syndrome, 1 child with tuberous sclerosis and epilepsy, 
1 child with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 1 child with 
Crouzon’s disease and 1 child with autism. 
Polysomnographic study (PSG) 

For the 40 neurologically normal children, the mean hours of 
recorded sleep time was 8.0 h (range 5.3 h to 10.4 h). Inter-
scorer variability between the three observers (IBM,MAH,PDW) 
was less than 10%. Apnoea was defined as any cessation of air 


Aetiological factors and development in subjects with OSA 

flow as measured by chest and abdominal motion and oronasal 
flow that was longer than the preceding two breaths. Apnoeas 
were subclassified as central, obstructive and mixed. Hypopneas 
were defined as any amplitude reduction in air flow of 50% 
or greater that lasted longer than the preceding two breaths. 
Hypopneas were subclassified as central, obstructive or mixed. 
An Obstructive Event Index (OEI) was defined as the sum of 
obstructive apnoeas, obstructive hypopnoeas, mixed apnoeas, 
and mixed hypopnoeas divided by the total sleep time in minutes 
then multiplied by 60. Oxygen saturation data were expressed 
as mean data for the total study time. Awake time and artefactual/
movement oxygen saturation data were deleted in 
accordance with previously described methods.14 Desaturation 
data were expressed as the mean number, time and percentage 
of the total study time equal to or less than 95%, 92%, 90% and 
85% saturation, respectively. 

OSA definition 

As described by Carroll et al.15 OSA was defined according to 
the obstructive event OEI from the PSG study. Children were 
rated as primary snorers (OEI < 1, n = 3), or as having mild OSA 
(OEI ³ 1 and < 5, n = 21), or moderate/severe OSA (³ 5, n =16). 
The OEI definition differs slightly to that of Carroll et al. in that no 
attempt was made to temporally link the oxygen desaturation to 
the respiratory events of apnoea and hypopnoea. The three 
primary snorers were excluded from the analysis. 

Equipment 

Monitoring equipment included an electroencephalograph (EEG: 
C3/A2, 02/A1; 10–20 international placement), two channels 
of electro-occulogram (EOG: KIC/A2, ROC/A1), chest and 
abdominal motion (Respitrace, Ambulatory Monitoring Inc., New 
York, USA), oxygen-saturation measurements (CSI: 504US P 
Criticare Systems, Waukesha, WI, USA), and transcutaneous 
carbon dioxide levels (Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark). 
Airflow as measured by pressure transducers (Differential 
Pressure Transducer no. 4500, Vacumetrics Inc., California, 
USA) and thermistors was recorded continuously onto a 
computerised sleep laboratory (Lamont NCI, Medical Systems 
International, Sydney, Australia). The oxygen saturation recordings 
were downloaded to an oximetry data analysis program 
(ODAS, G Harvey, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia), whereby artefact free statistical analysis 
was performed using a Mac II Cl computer. 

Development/temperament of OSA children 

At the time of the overnight sleep study, which was within one 
month of the clinical assessment, study children were tested 
using the Griffiths Mental Development Scales16 (n = 40). In 
addition to an overall developmental quotient, the subscales 
provide a profile of a number of developmental areas compared 
to measures such as the Bailey Scales of Development. The 
shortened versions of the Infant, Toddler and Child questionnaires17 
have strong psychometric properties and were derived 
by factor analysis based on data from the Australian Temperament 
Project. Questionnaires were completed by study 
parents at the time of the sleep study. Common to all three 

questionnaires were the areas of Rhythmicity, Approachability, 
and an Easy/Difficult scale. A child was considered to be problematic 
in an area if they were more than one standard deviation 
from the mean for the more difficult attribute. These aspects of 
temperament may reflect behavioural manifestations of OSA.18 

Parental questionnaire 

Detailed questionnaires concerning the perinatal history, the 
children’s health and their development was completed by the 
parents of the OSA and comparison children. 

Perinatal history: Events during the first and second half 
of the pregnancy including fevers, hypertension, sweating, 
fatigue, swelling, bleeding, infections, alcohol intake and 
smoking were recorded. Events at birth included the type of 
delivery, oxygen requirement, resuscitation and whether the 
infant cried immediately. 

Health: Parental reports of their child’s respiratory illnesses 
during the past year, including chest/ear infections, asthma, 
hayfever and snoring behaviour were recorded as well as 
allergies or a family history of allergy. 

Current development: A rating by parents of ‘average/above 
average’, ‘mild difficulty’, or ‘moderate/severe difficulty’ was 
given for the areas of speech, understanding language, hearing, 
hand skills, movement/co-ordination, social/play, dressing and 
eating. The mild and moderate/severe ratings were grouped to 
form a rating of ‘developmental’ concern, as very few parents 
reported ‘moderate/severe’ concerns. 

Other: Maternal education, maternal age and employment 
were recorded. 

Comparison group 

Information was available from a concurrent study19 where 
the same Parental Questionnaire as described above was 
administered to parents of 75 children less than 5 years of age 
attending the Outpatients Fracture clinic (61% male, 39% 
female, mean age 37 (5) months, range 8–62 months). This 
was considered an appropriate group for comparison of 
pregnancy and perinatal data, and the aetiology for fractures 
should be unrelated to OSA or developmental disorder. Eight 
(11%) of these children were habitual snorers, that is they 
snored ‘all of the time’ or ‘almost always’ and were therefore 
excluded from the analyses. Children in the Comparison group 
had no formal polysomnographic study or Griffiths developmental 
assessment, and parents did not complete the Temperament 
Scale. 

STATISTICAL ANALYSES 

Initially the OSA and comparison children were compared for 
pregnancy/perinatal risk factors, and parental reporting of 
development and health concerns as derived from the Parental 
Questionnaire. Secondly, Griffiths scores and infant temperament 
ratings were examined within the OSA group in relation to 
the severity of OSA. 

The Chi-square test was used, with Yates correction where 
appropriate for categorical data, and Student’s t-test was used to 
compare the mean Griffiths developmental scores. Where data 
were not normally distributed, the Mann–Whitney U-test was 


JMM Harvey et al. 

used. For comparison of means across OSA severity ratings, an 
analysis of variance was also used. Logistic regression was 
used to examine possible independent predictors of risk of 
OSA. A two-tailed P-value of less than 0.05 was considered 
to be statistically significant. Analysis was performed using 
SPSS PC+.20 

Ethical approval 

This study was approved by the Mater Children’s Hospital 
Research and Ethics Committee. 

RESULTS 

No significant differences were present between the OSA and 
the Comparison groups for, gender (68% study males vs 58% 
control males), age distribution (mean age 33 (SD 6) months vs 
37 (14) months), or maternal education and employment. The 
mean age of the study mothers was slightly lower than that of 
the comparison group (mean age 31 (5) years vs 33 (6) years, 
P = 0.05). 

Complications during pregnancy were increased in the study 
mothers, with a greater proportion reporting infections, fatigue 
and increased hospitalisations. Children with OSA were reported 
as less likely to have cried at birth, and more likely to have 
required oxygen, resuscitation and admission to a special care 
nursery. Smoking in early (20% vs 22%) and late (22% vs 16%) 
pregnancy was examined in the study and group controls, but 
the differences were not statistically significant. Asthma, chest 
infections and ear infections were also significantly more 
common in the children with OSA (Table 1). All significant predictors 
from Table 1 for the categories of pregnancy complications 
(model 1) and birth events (model 2) were examined in separate 
logistic models with risk of OSA as the dependant variable. 
Significant predictors from both of these models remained independent 
predictors of OSA when entered simultaneously into a 

final logistic model (hospitalised OR 13, 95% CI 2.0–82.8; poor 
sucking/feeding OR 5.7 CL 1.7–18.9). 

Sixty-eight per cent of children with OSA had a family history 
of allergies compared to 20% of the comparison group 
(P < 0.001). Ninety seven per cent of children with OSA had a 
family history of snoring, though similar data were unavailable 
for the Comparison group. 

A significantly greater proportion of children in the OSA group 
were rated by parents as having developmental concerns in the 
majority of areas evaluated (Table 2). For four of the six 
developmental areas in Table 2, the relevant subscales of the 
Griffiths Test for the OSA children could be examined. Maternal 
ratings of developmental concerns in speech, understanding 
sentences (Hearing/Speech subscale) and movement (Gross 
motor subscale), though not play skills (Personal/Social sub-
scale), corresponded closely with the Griffiths subscale scores. 
Griffiths GQ and subscale scores were compared for the 21 
children with mild OSA (OEI ³ 1, < 5) and the 16 children with 
moderate or severe OSA (OEI ³ 5). Scores in overall GQ (106 
vs 100, P = 0.1) and all subscales were consistently lower in the 
children with moderate/severe OSA, although no differences 
reached the level of statistical significance. 

If children with an OEI ³ 10 were considered as a separate 
severe group, there was no statistically significant difference 
between the mild 106 (11), moderate 102 (10) and severe 99 (15) 
group means, although GQ declined with increasing severity. 

The prevalences of adverse ratings in the temperament areas 
of Easy/Difficult, Rhythmicity and Approachability were compared 
between the mild and the moderate/severe OSA groups. No 
differences were statistically significant. Overall, 11(30%) of the 
37 OSA children were rated as having a difficult temperament 
(more than 1 standard deviation above the mean) which is higher 
than expected from the general population norms. 

As young infants may not show specific developmental 
delays, the analyses were repeated for parental developmental 
ratings and Griffiths scores excluding two study infants and three 
control infants who were less than 12 months of age. No significant 
changes in the results were found. 

Table 1 Comparison of the prevalence of significant maternal pregnancy complications, birth events and childhood illness for neurologically normal OSA 
children and comparison children 

OSA children Comparison group 
(n = 37) (n = 67) 
Total Problem Total Problem 
number (%) number (%) P-value 
Pregnancy complications 
Infections 36 17 62 3 0.007 
Hospitalised 36 19 62 3 0.007 
Fatigue 36 39 60 20 0.04 
Birth events 
No immediate cry 32 47 61 13 0.01 
Require oxygen 33 30 56 11 0.05 
Resuscitation 35 26 53 4 0.008 
Admitted to SCN 35 37 63 14 0.03 
Poor sucking/feeding 34 41 67 13 0.001 
Childhood illness 
Asthma 36 56 67 15 < 0.001 
Chest infections 35 70 67 33 < 0.001 
Ear infections 35 54 66 20 < 0.001 

Totals vary because of missing data/information unknown to mother; SCN = Special Care Nursery. 


Aetiological factors and development in subjects with OSA 

Table 2 Comparison of the prevalence of maternal ratings of current developmental concerns between OSA children and comparison children 

OSA Comparison group 
(n = 37) (n = 67) 
Developmental Total Concerns Total Concerns 
area group (%) group (%) P-value 
Speech 32 31 66 8 0.002 
Understanding sentences 32 28 63 8 0.008 
Hearing 36 36 67 0 < 0.001 
Play skills 35 20 64 2 0.001 
Movement 35 34 65 6 < 0.001 
Eating 36 37 65 7 < 0.001 

Numbers vary because of missing data. 

DISCUSSION 

Children with OSA in this study had a higher prevalence of 
maternal pregnancy complications, perinatal problems, respiratory 
related health problems and parental reports of current 
developmental difficulty than children in the comparison group. 
We found no statistically significant association between the 
severity of OSA and either the Griffiths score or a rating of more 
difficult temperament, although there was a consistent trend for 
lower GQ scores in children with moderate/severe OSA. 

Relatively few studies to date have dealt with pregnancy or 
birth events as risk factors for later OSA in children. Kahn et al.11 
examined exposures during pregnancy of mothers whose 
children had apnoeic events, and reported that increased 
smoking during pregnancy was significantly related to increased 
frequency and duration of these events. Study mothers were 
also more likely to report bleeding during pregnancy. Blurton-
Jones et al.21 found an association between increased adverse 
perinatal biological events in the mothers of children who had 
frequent night wakings and disturbance of sleep. 

The increased rates of adverse pregnancy and perinatal 
events in mothers of our children with OSA suggest that these 
may predispose the child to more severe OSA possibly by 
impaired neural control of the upper airway, although the mechanisms 
of this association are uncertain. If all women with 
missing data were assumed to have no perinatal difficulties, then 
these differences would still be marked and statistically significant. 
An alternative explanation would be recall bias, with 
mothers of mothers of children with OSA being more sensitive to 
recollecting adverse events in pregnancy. It was possible to 
examine the maternal charts of the eight study children born 
within the Mater Hospital. Comparison of the maternal reports 
and the actual birth records confirmed all adverse perinatal 
reports. We cannot exclude, however, the possibility that 
selection factors may have operated where children with more 
medically complex histories or associated behavioural/developmental 
difficulties were preferentially referred to the Sleep Unit. 

More recently, a number of studies have suggested that 
genetic factors may also predispose the individual to apnoeic 
events.22–24 Given the high prevalence of snoring in the family 
history of our study children, genetic factors should also be 
considered as a potential determinant of OSA. 

Increased respiratory illness in children with OSA is common 
and has been observed frequently in other studies.25 Gaultier10 
has suggested that symptoms of OSA are more pronounced 
at times of intercurrent respiratory illness, and this may have led 
to preferential referral of children with recurrent respiratory 

disease. Recurrent middle ear disease is associated with 
developmental and behavioural difficulties, especially speech 
and attentional problems13,26 and may mediate the association 
between OSA and these outcomes. 

In this study, despite exclusion of the neurologically abnormal 
children, parental reports of mild and moderate/severe difficulty 
in a number of current developmental areas was significantly 
increased in contrast to the comparison group. While it is 
possible that mothers of children who have been diagnosed with 
a disease are more likely to overidentify problems of behaviour 
and development in their child, Glascoe and Sandler27 found that 
overall parental age-estimates of development in young children 
were 81% sensitive to likely developmental problems in the 
areas of fine motor, language, gross motor and behaviour 
although specificity was lower. Pulsifer et al.28 also support this 
conclusion and reported that maternal reliability was independent 
of maternal education and parenting experience. There was 
also a consistent association between a parental rating of developmental 
difficulty and lower corresponding Griffiths subscale 
scores. As mentioned previously, however, children with OSA 
and associated developmental disorder may be preferentially 
referred for sleep studies. 

The findings of lower GQ and subscales scores on the Griffiths 
test in children with moderate/severe OSA were not statistically 
significant and may be due to chance. Due to lack of resources it 
was not possible to perform polysomnographic and Griffiths 
studies on control children so that the high prevalence of parental 
developmental concerns in OSA children could be confirmed by a 
comparison of the Griffith scores. The limited analyses possible, 
however of parental concerns and Griffiths subscale scores were 
suggestive of consistency. The Griffiths scores in the OSA 
children may be lower than reported, as recent restandardisation 
of the Griffiths scale in the UK suggests that it overestimates GQ 
by 11 points.29 Temperamental or behavioural difficulty in children 
with OSA has been well recognised.7,8 Guilleminault et al.6 
reported that 40% of a cohort of 25 children with continuous 
partial obstruction were either aggressive and rebellious or 
socially withdrawn. If OSA is related to development and 
temperament, severity of OSA might have been expected to 
influence the strength of this association. The spectrum of 
severity of OSA within our sample is similar to that of Carroll 
et al.15 Study size was limited by the complexity and cost of sleep 
studies, and though larger than many similar studies in the literature,
2,4 the lack of statistical significance may be a beta error 
and reflect a lack of power. This particularly needs to be considered 
as the difference in overall GQ between the mild and 
moderate/severe group was 6 GQ points, which is half a standard 


deviation on the Griffiths Test and may be of clinical significance. 
Though no association was present with global measures of 
development assessment, examination of more specific cognitive 
functions such as memory, vigilance and attention as reported in 
adult studies2,3,30 may have resulted in different findings. 

In summary, this study suggests that a number of pregnancy, 
perinatal and respiratory factors may predispose to OSA in 
neurologically normal children. Mothers of children with OSA 
were more likely to report developmental concerns and more 
difficult temperament traits, although the association between 
severity of OSA and development or temperament was not 
statistically significant. Because of possible selection bias and 
lack of polysomnographic data for normal children, findings from 
this study suggest that there is a need for population-based 
polysomnographic studies of OSA and control children in association 
with detailed assessments of development, specific 
cognitive functions, behaviour and temperament. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We wish to acknowledge the support of J Wang in association 
with the Tzu Chi Charity Foundation. We wish also to acknowledge 
the JP Kelly Foundation. 

REFERENCES 

1 
Ali NJ, Pitson DJ, Stradling JR. Snoring, sleep disturbance, and 
behaviour in 4–5 year olds. Arch. Dis. Child. 1992; 68: 360–6. 

2 
Findley LJ, Barth JT, Powers DC, Wilhoit SC, Boyd DG, Suratt PM. 
Cognitive impairment in patients with obstructive sleep apnea and 
associated hypoxemia. Chest 1990; 90: 686–90. 

3 
Montplaiser J, Bedard MA, Richer F, Rouleau I. Neurobehavioral 
manifestations in obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome before and 
after treatment with continuous positive airway pressure. Sleep 
1992; 15: 517–9. 

4 
Kasian GF, Duncan WJ, Tyrrell MJ, Oman-Ganes LA. Elective 
oro-tracheal intubation to diagnose sleep apnea syndrome in 
children with Down’s syndrome and ventricular septal defect. Can. J. 
Cardiol. 1987; 3: 2–5. 

5 
Brouillette RT, Fernbach SK, Hunt CE. Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
Syndrome in infants and children. Pediatrics 1982; 100: 31–40. 

6 
Guilleminault C, Winkle R, Korobkin R, Simmons B. Children and 
nocturnal snoring: Evaluation of the effects of sleep related respiratory 
resistive load and daytime functioning. Eur. J. Pediatr. 1982; 

139: 165–71. 
7 
Weissbluth M, Davis T, Poncher J, Reiff J. Signs of airway obstruction 
during sleep and behavioural, developmental, and academic 
performance. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 1983; 4: 119–21. 

8 
Stradling JR, Thomas G, Warley ARH, Williams P, Freeland A. 
Effect of adenotonsillectomy of nocturnal hypoxaemia, sleep 
disturbance, and symptoms in snoring children. Lancet 1990; 

335: 249–53. 
9 
Ali NJ, Pitson D, Stradling JR. Sleep disordered breathing: effects of 
adenotonsillectomy on behavior and psychological functioning. 
Eur. J. Paediatr. 1996; 155: 56–62. 

JMM Harvey et al. 

10 
Gaultier C. Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome in infants and 
children: established facts and unsettled issues. Thorax 1995; 

50: 1204–10. 
11 
Kahn A, Groswasser J, Settiaux M et al. Prenatal exposure to cigarettes 
in infants with obstructive sleep apneas. Pediatrics 1994; 

93: 778–83. 
12 
McLaren J, Bryson SE. Review of recent epidemiological studies of 
mental retardation: prevalence, associated disorders, and aetiology. 
Am. J. Ment. Retard. 1987; 92: 243–54. 

13 
Teele DW, Klein JO, Rosner BA. Otitis media and effusion during the 
first three years of life and development of speech and language. 
Pediatrics 1984; 74: 282–7. 

14 
Masters IB, Goes AM, Healy L, O’Neil M, Stephens D, Harris MA. 
Age-related changes in oxygen saturation over the first year of life: a 
longitudinal study. J. Paediatr. Child Health 1994; 30: 423–8. 

15 
Carroll JL, McColley SA, Marcus CL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM. Inability 
of clinical history to distinguish primary snoring from obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome in children. Chest 1995; 108: 610–8. 

16 
Griffiths R. The Abilities of Young Children: A Comprehensive System 
of Mental Measurement for the First Eight Years of Life. The Test 
Agency, High Wycombe, UK, 1970. 

17 
Prior M, Sanson A, Oberklaid F. The Australian Temperament 
Project. In: Kohnstamm G, Bates J, Rothbart M., eds. Temperament 
in Childhood. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1989: 537–54. 

18 
Guilleminault C, Korobkin R, Winkle R. A review of 50 children with 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Lung 1981; 159: 275–87. 

19 
Harvey JM, O’Callaghan MJ, Vines B. Prevalence of maternal 
depression and its relationship to ADL skills in children with developmental 
delay. J. Pediatr. Child Health 1997; 33: 42–6. 

20 
Norusis MJ. SPSS for Windows (6.0). SPSS Inc, Michigan USA, 
1993. 

21 
Blurton-Jones N, Rossetti Ferreira MC, Farquar Brown M, 
MacDonald BL. The association between perinatal factors and later 
night waking. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 1978; 20: 427–34. 

22 
Pillar G, Lavie P. Assessment of the role of inheritance in sleep 
apnoea syndrome. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 1995; 151 (3 Part l): 
688–91. 

23 
Jennum P, Hein HO, Suadicani P, Sorenson H, Gyntelberg F. 
Snoring, family history, and genetic markers in men. The Copenhagen 
Male Study. Chest 1995; 107: 1289–93. 

24 
Guilleminault C, Partinen M, Hollman K, Powell N, Stoohs R. Familial 
aggregates in obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. Chest 1995; 107: 
1545–51. 

25 
Carroll JL, Loughlin GM. Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome in 
Infants and Children: Clinical Features and Pathophysiology. In: 
Ferber R, Kryger M, eds. Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine 
in the Child. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, 1995: 163–91. 

26 
Haggard MP, Birkin JA, Browning GG, Gatehouse S, Lewis, S. 
Behaviour problems in otitis media. Pediatr. Infect. Dis. J. 1994; 13: 
S43–50. 

27 
Glascoe FP, Sandler H. Value of parents’ estimates of children’s 
developmental ages. Pediatrics 1995; 127: 831–5. 

28 
Pulsifer MB, Hoon AH, Palmer FB, Gopalan R, Capute AL. Maternal 
estimates of developmental age in preschool children. Pediatrics 
1994; 125: S18–S24. 

29 
Griffiths R. The Griffiths Mental Development Scales from birth to 2 
years. Manual. The Test Agency. Henley-on-Thames, UK, 1996. 

30 
Grant I, Prigatano GP, Heaton RK, McSweeny J, Adams, KM, Timms 
RM. Progressive neuropsychologic Impairment and hypoxemia. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 1987; 44: 999–1006. 


