J. Paediatr. Child Health (1999) 35, 136–139 
Six-month follow-up of children with obstructive 
sleep apnoea 


JMM HARVEY,1 MJ O’CALLAGHAN,1 PD WALES,2 MA HARRIS2 and IB MASTERS2 

1The Developmental Clinic and 2Department of Respiratory Medicine, Mater Children’s Hospital, South Brisbane, 
Queensland, Australia 

Objectives: This study examined prospectively changes in development, temperament and sleep related behaviour 
in children referred for obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and polysomnographic sleep study, some of whom had surgical 
intervention. 
Methodology: Using a prospective cohort study design, parents of 56 children referred for OSA completed sleep and 
temperament questionnaires and their child was assessed developmentally at the time of the polysomnographic sleep study. 
Forty (72%) of the children were neurologically normal. At 6 months, 42 children were reassessed using sleep and temperament 
questionnaires and a developmental assessment. After excluding the primary snorers, subjects were categorised as 
having had intervention (n = 24) or not (n = 15), and differences over the 6-month period in Griffiths scores, temperament and 
sleep related behaviour were examined. 
Results: Regardless of intervention status, there was an improvement in night-time and day-time sleep behaviour for the 
total group, though the extent of improvement was more marked in the intervention group. For the neurologically normal 
children, improvement in the sleep behaviour was only significant for the intervention group (P < 0.05). Intervention did not 
result in any significant changes in Griffiths developmental score or temperament. 
Conclusion: Surgical intervention improves sleep behaviour in children though not temperament or development. 

Key words: OSA; development; intervention; sleep. 

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) has been associated with 
developmental and behavioural difficulty in young children. As 
children with pre-existing neurological or developmental disorder 
appear to be at increased risk of OSA,1 it may be difficult to 
differentiate the effects of the OSA from that of the primary 
disorder. While the benefits of intervention on certain respiratory 
indices have been reported in children with OSA2,3 there is 
limited information concerning improvement in development or 
behaviour in children.4 Improvement in memory, cognition and 
attention have, however, been observed in adult patients with 
OSA.5,6 

The hypothesis of this study was that surgical intervention for 
OSA will lead to improvement not only in night and day symptoms 
of OSA, but also in the child’s development and temperament. 

METHODS 

Subjects 

Fifty-six children (35 ± 16 months), 40 of whom were neurologically 
normal, were referred for OSA and attended a medical 
review, developmental assessment and overnight polysomno-

Correspondence: JMM Harvey, Rm 203, Aubigny Place, Mater Children’s 
Hospital, Mater Hill, Brisbane, Qld 4101, Australia. Fax: 617 38401744; 
e-mail: jharvey@mater.org.au 

JMM Harvey, Grad Dip Lib Sci, Med, Research Officer. MJ O’Callaghan, 
FRACP, MSc, Director of Developmental and Rehabilitative Medicine. 
PD Wales, B. Nsg, Clinical Nurse. MA Harris, FRACP, Respiratory 
Physician. IB Masters, FRACP, Director of Respiratory Medicine. 

Accepted for publication 16 September 1998. 

graphic (PSG) sleep study at the Mater Children’s Sleep Unit. All 
children presented with frequent snoring, plus either witnessed 
apnoea, day-time sleepiness or restless sleep. OSA was defined 
according to the obstructive event index (OEI) from PSG study.7 
Children were rated as primary snorers (OEI < 1, n = 5), or as 
having mild OSA (OEI ³ 1 and < 5, n = 26), or moderate/severe 
OSA (³ 5, n = 25). The OEI definition differs slightly to that of 
Carroll et al.7 in that no attempt was made to temporally link 
the oxygen desaturation to the respiratory events of apnoea 
and hypopnoea. Forty-two (75%) children attended follow up 
6 months later (range 5.7–6.7 months) and, excluding 3 primary 
snorers, were categorised as having had intervention (n = 24) 
(tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, T & A), waiting on intervention 
(n = 5), or not requiring intervention (n = 10). Because 
they were generally similar apart from a higher OEI (median 

5.5 vs. 3.1, P = 0.14), children waiting on intervention and 
those not receiving intervention were combined as the nonintervention 
group for analysis. The mean age at follow up was 
40 ± 17 months; 29 (69%) children were male and 31 (74%) 
children were neurologically normal. 
Initial assessments (Time 1) 

Overnight PSG: A detailed PSG study was performed. Details 
regarding the PSG study are describe elsewhere.8 OEI was 
formulated using the sum of obstructive apnoeas, obstructive 
hypopnoeas, mixed apnoeas, and mixed hypopnoeas divided by 
the total sleep time in minutes then multiplied by 60. 
Night Symptoms Questionnaire: A questionnaire outlining 
snoring and sleeping behaviour derived from other paediatric 
studies on OSA9–11 was administered. A total score was 


Six month follow-up of children with OSA 

Table 1 Night Symptoms Questionnaire 

†Does your child….. 
snore 
snort during sleep 
have pauses in breathing 
have difficult sounding breathing when asleep 
snore continuously throughout the night 
snore when he/she has a cold 
have trouble falling asleep 
wake during the night 
wake up fearful during the night 
have unusual sleeping positions 
sleep with head thrown back/back arched 
sweat at night/have a restless sleeping pattern 
breathe through the mouth when asleep 
eat excessively at night 
drink fluids during night 
wet the bed 

pass urine during night 

† (0) never, (1) 1–2 times/week, (2) 3–6 nights/week, (3) always. 
computed with the higher score (maximum = 51) indicating more 
severe symptoms (Table 1). 
Day Symptoms Questionnaire: Parents completed a questionnaire 
similar to the Night Symptoms Questionnaire regarding the 
day-time performance of their child, including aspects of sleepiness, 
behaviour and appetite which have been reported in 
children with OSA.12–14 A total score was computed, with the 
higher score (maximum = 36) indicating poor performance. 
Development: All children were assessed using the Griffiths 
Scales of Mental Ability.15 
Temperament: Parents completed a temperament questionnaire 
derived from the Australian Temperament Project for either 
infants, toddlers or children.16 Common to all three questionnaires 
were the areas of Easy/Difficult, Approachability and 
Rhythmicity. A child was considered problematic if they were 
more than one standard deviation above the mean for that age 
group in any of the areas. 
Demographic Data: Maternal education, maternal age and 
employment were recorded. 

Six month follow-up assessment (Time 2) 

The questionnaires for night and day symptoms of OSA, the 
child temperament questionnaires and the Griffiths Scales of 
Mental Abilities were readministered by the same researcher 
blinded to the intervention status of the child. The PSG study 
was not repeated. 

DESIGN AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

This was a prospective cohort study. Excluding the primary 
snorers, children were divided into two groups: those who had 
surgical intervention, or those who were either waiting on intervention 
or not requiring intervention. Changes in individual 
Griffiths developmental scores, night symptoms of OSA and 
day-time symptoms scores after a 6-month period were 
examined in the two groups using the paired t-test. When the 
data were not normally distributed, the Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test 
was used. Overall group changes in temperament were also 

examined using the chi square test with Yates correction as 
appropriate. This analysis was repeated for the neurologically 
normal subset of children. Statistical significance was considered 
if a two-tailed P-value was less than or equal to 0.05. 
Analysis was performed using SPSS PC+.17 Confidence 
intervals were calculated using CIA.18 

RESULTS 

After excluding children with primary snoring, comparison was 
made between those children seen (n = 39) at 6 months follow-
up with those lost to follow-up (n = 12) (Table 2). Children 
attending follow-up had a more severe OEI though differences 
were not statistically significant. 

For children with OSA attending follow-up (n = 39), the intervention 
group (n = 24) was compared to the non-intervention 
group (n = 15). Gender, mean age prevalence of neurological 
abnormality and median OEI were not significantly different. 

Changes in scores for individual children over the 6-month 
period for night and day symptoms of OSA were expressed as 
mean differences for the total intervention and non-intervention 
groups (Table 3). There were significant improvements in night-
and day-time symptoms score for the intervention group, and 
while not as marked, children who had no intervention also 
improved significantly in these symptoms. For the neurologically 
normal children, both intervention and non-intervention groups 
improved, though this was only statistically significant for the 
intervention group. 

Mean changes in individual Griffiths scores are shown for the 
intervention and non-intervention groups (Table 4). Differences 
were statistically significant for the total group of children who 
were either waiting on or not requiring intervention. Within the 
neurologically normal children, there were no significant 
improvements in GQ over the 6-month period in either the intervention 
or non-intervention group. Though not presented in the 
table, there were no statistically significant differences in 
subscale scores for the Griffiths assessment. 

Adverse temperament scores for the overall easy/difficult, 
approachability and rhythmicity scales improved for both intervention 
and non-intervention groups. Improvements were only 
significant, however, for the easy/difficult scale in the nonintervention 
group (36% vs 13%, P = 0.002). 

As intervention did not result in any improvement in Griffith 
General Quotient (GQ) compared to non-intervention, other 

Table 2 Comparison of waiting for intervention and non-intervention 
OSA children 

Lost to 
follow-up Attended 
(n = 12) (n = 39) 
n (%) n (%) P-value 
Gender 8 (67) 26 (67) 1.0 
Difficult temperament 2 (17) 14 (37) 0.2 
Neurological abnormality 4 (33) 10 (26) 0.6 
median median 
Day-time Questionnaire 11.4 10.0 0.6 
Night-time Questionnaire 26.2 30.2 0.2 
OEI (median) 4.6 4.8 0.5 
mean (SD) mean (SD) 
Age (months) 41.9 (12.6) 32.8 (17) 0.06 
GQ (Time 1) 90 (28) 96 (21) 0.5 


JMM Harvey et al. 

Table 3 Changes in night and day symptoms of OSA within the intervention and non-intervention groups for the total group and the neurologically 
normal children 

No 

†T & A 
Intervention/waiting 
Total group (n = 24) (n = 15) 
Night symptoms total mean difference – 16.3 – 7.5 
(95% CI) (– 9.1, – 2.8) (– 12.2, – 2.8) 
P-value < 0.0001 0.004 
Day symptoms total mean difference – 5.5 – 2.6 
(95% CI) (– 7.3, – 3.6) (– 5.6, – 0.31) 
P-value < 0.0001 0.017 

Neurologically normal 
subset (n = 17) (n = 12) 

Night symptoms total mean difference – 15.0 – 5.9 
(95% CI) (– 19.5, – 10.6) (– 11.5, – 0.4) 
P-value < 0.0001 0.04 
Day symptoms total mean difference – 5.98 – 3.05 
(95% CI) (– 8.0, – 4.0) (– 6.8, 0.7) 
P-value < 0.0001 0.1 

†Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (or just adenoidectomy). 
Table 4 Change in GQ score within the total group and the neurologically 
normal children who had either intervention or no intervention 

†T & A No intervention/ 
waiting 
Total group 
(n = 24) (n = 15) 

General Quotient (GQ) 
mean difference 2.0 3.6 
(95% CI) (– 2.6, 6.6) (0.06, 7.2) 
P-value NS 0.05 

Neurologically normal (n = 17) (n = 12) 
subset 
General Quotient (GQ) mean difference 2.8 3.8 
(95% CI) (– 3.1, 8.7) (– 0.5, 8.0) 
P-value NS NS 

†Tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy. 
predictors of changes in GQ in the total OSA group were 
examined. Factors including age, gender, neurological status, 
severity of OSA, and percentage of study time on PSG for 
desaturations less than 92% did not significantly predict change 
in GQ in either the total OSA group or the neurologically normal 
subset. 

DISCUSSION 

In this study we found that night-time and day-time symptoms of 
OSA improved for the total group and the neurologically normal 
children regardless of intervention status. The extent of 
improvement, however, was more marked in children who had 
intervention. For children who were neurologically normal, the 
improvement was only statistically significant for the intervention 
group. There was improvement of 2–3 points in Griffiths 
scores for intervention and non-intervention children in the total 
group and the neurologically normal subset. The only group 
where the improvement was statistically significant was for the 
non-intervention children and the total group. There was no 

significant reduction in adverse temperament traits in either the 
intervention or non-intervention groups. 

Other studies have reported the improvements in day-time 
performance of children who were snorers and who had 
surgical intervention. Stradling et al.9 examined 61 children who 
were selected for adenotonsilectomy compared to 31 healthy 
children for symptoms of apnoea, sleep hypoxemia, sleep 
disturbance, aspects of behaviour and learning. As with our 
study, significant improvements in sleep disturbance occurred 
in the OSA children postoperatively and improvements in 
learning difficulty, hyperactivity and aggression were reported, 
though not documented in detail. In this study, the comparison 
group was a convenience sample of controls matched for 
gender and age rather than snoring children not undergoing 
intervention. Had such comparisons been made, it is possible 
that findings similar to those in this study may have resulted 
because of the fluctuating history of the condition and regression 
towards the mean in reporting of extreme symptoms. 
Similarly, the study19 followed only those children who had intervention, 
and reported improvements in sleep parameters. 
Neither the study of Frank et al.19 or that of Guilleminault et al.13 
reported systematically measures of development or intelligence 
post intervention. 

In the adult literature, the effects of intervention for OSA are 
more clearly defined with improvements reported as early as 
within 1 week post treatment in the areas of vigilance5 attention 
and non-verbal general intellectual functioning.6 

Improvements in various sleep indices of OSA have also been 
reported as a result of treatment.3,6,19 In our study, there was a 
significant improvement in GQ scores in the non-intervention 
group over the 6-month period, though this was no longer significant 
after adjusting for neurological abnormality. Furthermore, 
numbers were small and results must therefore be interpreted 
with some caution. 

Limitations of this study include absence of randomisation to 
intervention or non-intervention, loss to follow-up, limited 
measures of more specific cognitive abilities, and study size. 
Although intervention decisions were made clinically, it is likely 
that these were also children with more severe OSA and who 


Six month follow-up of children with OSA 

therefore had greater potential to benefit from intervention. 
Loss to follow-up is unlikely to effect the validity of study 
conclusions given the similarity between the study and the loss 
to follow-up groups and the small changes in GQ reported. 
Though a beta error is possible, differences of 2–3 points in 
GQ are unlikely to be clinically important. While it is possible 
there were changes in more specific areas of development 
including attention and vigilance, these areas are difficult to 
test in children of such a young age. Though the study is relatively 
small, which affects the precision of the estimate of 
change due to intervention, PSG studies are expensive and 
time consuming with this study reflecting the experience of a 
tertiary sleep unit. 

The findings of this study suggest that intervention for OSA 
does not result in improved overall development and temperament, 
at least at 6-months follow-up, though improvements in 
more specific aspects of cognitive function or behaviour cannot 
be excluded. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors wish to thank Julia Wang in association with the Tzu 
Chi Charity Foundation, and the JP Kelly Research Foundation 
at the Mater Hospital, Brisbane. 

REFERENCES 

1 
Kasian GF, Duncan WJ, Tyrrell MJ, Oman-Ganes LA. Elective oro


tracheal intubation to diagnose sleep apnea syndrome in children 

with Down’s syndrome and ventricular septal defect. Can. J. Cardiol. 

1987; 3: 2–5. 

2 
Mauer KW, Staats BA, Olsen KD. Upper airway obstruction and 

disordered nocturnal breathing in children. Mayo Clin. Proc. 1983; 

58: 349–53. 
3 
Waters KA, Everett FM, Bruderer J, Sullivan CE. Obstructive sleep 

apnea: the use of nasal CPAP in 80 children. Am. J. Respir. Crit. 

Care Med. 1995; 152: 780–5. 

4 
Ali NJ, Pitson D, Stradling JR. Sleep disordered breathing: effects of 
adenotonsillectomy on behaviour and psychological functioning. 
Eur. J. Paediatrics 1996; 155: 56–62. 

5 
Scheltens P, Visscher F, Van Keimpema AR et al. Sleep Apnoea 
Syndrome presenting with cognitive impairment. Neurology 1991; 

41: 155–6. 
6 
Bedard MA, Montplaisir J, Malo J, et al. Persistent neuropsychological 
deficits and vigilence impairment in sleep apnea syndrome 
after treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). 

J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 1993; 15: 330–41. 
7 
Carroll JL, Loughlin GM. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in 
infants and children: clinical features and pathophysiology. In: Ferber 
R, Kryger M, eds. Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine in the 
Child. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, 1995: 163–91. 

8 
Masters IB, Harvey JM, Wales PD, O’Callagahn MJ, Harris M. 
Clinical versus polysonmographic profiles in children with OSA. 

J. Paediatr. Child Health 1999; 35: 49–54. 
9 
Stradling JR, Thomas G, Warley ARH, Williams P, Freeland A. Effect 
of adenotonsillectomy on nocturnal hypoxaemia, sleep disturbance, 
and symptoms in snoring children. Lancet 335: 249–53. 

10 
Gaultier C. Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome in infants and children: 
established facts and unsettled issues. Thorax 1995; 50: 1204–10. 

11 
Ali NJ. Sleep disturbance and behaviour in 4–5 year olds. Arch. Dis. 
Child. 1993; 68: 360–6. 

12 
Weissbluth M, Davis T, Poncher J, Reiff J. Signs of airway obstruction 
during sleep and behavioural, developmental, and academic 
performance. Dev. Behav. Pediatr. 1983; 4: 119–21. 

13 
Guilleminault C, Korobkin R, Winkle R. A review of 50 children with 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Lung 1981; 159: 275–87. 

14 
Gaultier C. Sleep related breathing disorders. 6. Obstructive sleep 
apnoea syndrome in infants and children: established facts and 
unsettled issues. Thorax 1995; 50: 1204–10. 

15 
Griffiths R. The abilities of young children: a comprehensive system 
of mental measurement for the first eight years of life. The Test 
Agency, High Wycombe, UK, 1970. 

16 
Prior M, Sanson A, Oberklaid F. The Australian Temperament 
Project. In: Kohnstamm G, Bates J, Rothbart M, eds. Temperament 
in Childhood. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1989: 537–54. 

17 
Norusis MJ. SPSS for Windows (6.0). SPSS Inc, Michigan USA, 
1993. 

18 
Gardner MJ, Gardner SB, Winter PD. Confidence Interval Analysis 
(CIA), Version 1.2. BMJ Publishing, London, 1980. 

19 
Frank Y, Kravath RE, Pollack CP, et al. Obstructive sleep apnoea 
syndrome and its therapy; clinical and polysomnographic manifestations. 
Pediatrics 1983; 71: 737–42. 

20 
Aljadeff G, Gozal D, Bailey Wahl SL, et al. Effects of overnight 
supplemental oxygen in obstructive sleep apnea in children. Am. J. 
Respir. Crit. Care Med. 1996; 153: 51–5. 


