The Journal of Laryngology & Otology 

September 2002, Vol. 116, pp. 711ñ715 

Polysomnographic studies in children undergoing 
adenoidectomy and/or tonsillectomy 

Anubhav Jain,M.S.,D.N.B.,J.K.Sahni,M.S.,M.N.A.M.S. 

Abstract 

Forty children (age group four to 12 years) undergoing adenoidectomy and/or tonsillectomy were 
subjectedtopre-andpost-operativepolysomnography.Thorough clinical evaluationandX-raysofttissue 
nasopharynxlateralviewwascarried outforallthepatients.Thetonsilswereclinicallygradedfromgrade 
Ito IV,whereastheadenoidsweremeasuredradiographically(usingthreedifferentmeasurements)inall 
children.Thirtyoutof40(75per cent)childrenpresented withpredominant obstructivesymptoms,outof 
whom22(73.3percent) werefoundtohaveobstructivesleep apnoea(OSA), i.e.apnoeaindex>.veper 
hour.The remaining10(25percent)hadpredominantlyinèammatory symptomsonpresentation and out 
ofthesetwo(20per cent)werefoundtohaveOSA.Relativeadenoid size expressed asa ratiobetween 
thedistancefromthepointofmaximumthicknessofadenoidsalong alinedrawnalong a straightpartof 
the basiocciput and distance from the posterior nasal spine to the antero-inferior edge of the sphenobasioccipital 
synchondrosis,wasfound tohavea highly signi.cant correlationwiththegradeofOSA.In 
our study,allpatientswiththisratiogreaterthan0.64 werefound tohaveOSA.Nocorrelationbetween 
tonsilsizeandgradeofOSA wasfound.Therewasahighly signi.cantimprovementinpolysomnographic 
scores following surgery in all patients. 

Key words:SleepApnoea,Obstructive; Adenoidectomy;Tonsillectomy; Polysomnography 

Introduction 

Adenotonsillar hypertrophy is the most common 
cause ofOSAinchildren.1ñ3Prolongedupperairway 
obstruction leading to abnormal facial morphology, 
growth retardation, and cor-pulmonale is well 
documented.1,2,4,5 Adenotonsillectomy results in 
relief of symptoms in the majority of children 
presenting with OSA.2,6 

Nocturnal polysomnography has generally been 
accepted as the gold standard for the diagnosis of 
OSAsyndrome.7Butduetotheprohibitive costsof 
installation and maintenance of formal polysomnography, 
clinicianshavebeendiagnosing and treating 
OSA on the basis of history and physical examination 
alone. Despite extensive research in this .eld, 
the exact incidence of OSA and the correlation 
betweenits variationin severity withadenotonsillar 
size remainsunestablished. 

The aims ofthis study were to know the incidence 
of OSA in children undergoing adenotonsillectomy; 
toassessthe correlationbetweenadenotonsillar size 
andgradeofOSA,ifany;to studythechangesinthe 
variousphysiologicalparametersduringsleepbefore 
and after surgery; and to identify factors that might 
helpinestablishingprecise criteriafordiagnosisand 
intervention in suspected cases ofOSA. 

Materials and methods 

The study was conducted in the Department of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Lady Hardinge Medical College 
andits associatedhospitals.Forty children in the 
age group of four to 12 years with adenoid and/or 
tonsillar hypertrophy, who were taken up for 
adenoidectomy and/or tonsillectomy were enrolled 
in this study. The children were recruited consecutivelyfromthose 
seen asout-patientsand scheduled 
for surgery over a period of 14 months from 
February 2000 to March 2001. Out of these, 30 
patients (75 per cent) had presented to the outpatient 
department of our hospital with predominantlyobstructive 
symptomsand10patients(25per 
cent) had predominantly inèammatory symptoms. 
Children with Downís syndrome, diagnosed craniofacial 
anomaly, delayed milestones, mental retardation, 
excessiveobesity(morethan20percent above 
normal for the given age and height) were not 
included in the study. 

In all children, grading of tonsillar size was 
performedaccordingtothefollowingclinicalcriteria: 
Grade I: tonsils within the anterior pillar; Grade II: 
tonsils extending beyond the anterior pillar but 
never reaching the midline; Grade III: tonsils not 

FromtheDepartmentofOtolaryngology,andLadyHardingeMedical College andAssociated Smt. SuchetaKriplaniandKalawati 
SaranChildrenísHospitals,NewDelhi,India. 
Acceptedfor publication:2May2002. 


711 


a. jain,j.k. sahni 
Fig. 1Line diagramshowingAB(measuredinmm).Absolutevalueof adenoidal hypertrophy expressed as a perpendiculardistanceat maximum convexity-measuredfromalinejoiningtheuppermostpartofpterygomaxillaryfossa and anteriortipof atlas.


reachingthemidlinewhen thepatient openshis/her 
mouth, but doing so when the patient gags. Grade 

IV: tonsils reaching the midline at all times. 
Allchildrenwere subjectedto anX-ray soft tissue 
nasopharynx lateral view taken from a standard 
distanceof90cm.Thefollowing measurements were 
made:8 

AB ñ (measured in mm). Absolute value of 
adenoidalhypertrophy expressed asaperpendicular 
distance at maximum convexity ñ measured from a 
line joining the uppermost part of the pterygomaxillary 
fossa and anterior tip of atlas (Figure 1). 

CD ratio ñ Represents relative value of adenoidal 
hypertrophy,whereCis thedistance from thepointof 
maximumthicknessof adenoids alonga lineperpendiculartothelinethatisdrawnalongthe 
straight part 
of thebasiocciput andD is thedistance from the 
posterior nasalspinetotheantero-inferioredgeofthe 
sphenobasioccipital synchondrosis(Figure2). 

EF ñ(measuredinmm).Distancefrom posterior 
nasal spine to the surface of the adenoid shadow 
along the line drawn from the posterior nasal spine 

(E) to thebasion(F)(Figure3). 
All the children were subjected to polysomnographybefore, 
andsix toeightweeksfollowing surgery. 
The study was carried out using an Oxford 
Medilog MPA-S solid-state sleep and respiration 
recorder. The MPA-S consists of a main unit, a 
patient junction box, a power supply unit and leads 
for parameters to be recorded. The parameters 
recorded during the study were EEG, EMG, EOG, 
ECG,nasal airèow,oralèow, thoracicand abdominal 
movement, and blood oxygen saturation. 

The childwasmade comfortable,following which 
thetypeoftesttobecarried out wasexplainedtothe 
child.After attachingtheelectrodesandthoracicand 
abdominal strain gauges, a visual check on signal 


Fig. 2 
Line diagram showing CD ratio ñ represents relative value of 
adenoidalhypertrophy,whereCisthedistancefrom pointto 
maximum thickness ofadenoids along alineperpendicularto 
thelinethatisdrawnalongthestraightpartofthebasiocciput 
andDisthedistancefromposterior nasal spine tothe anteroinferior 
edge of the sphenobasioccipitalsynchondrosis. 


quality was carried out.The recordingwasanalysed 
in the morning and a report prepared consisting of 
various measured variables. 

The following cut-off values were used in this 
study: 

(1) Apnoea: cessation of airèow at the nostrils and 
mouthlastingforaminimumof10 seconds. 
(2) Hypopnoea: airèow threshold at the lips and 
noselessthan50per cent,lastingforaminimum 
of 10 seconds. 
Fig. 3 

Line diagram showingEF(measuredinmm).Distance from 
posterior nasal spine to the surface of the adenoid shadow 
alongthelinedrawnfrom theposteriornasalspine(E)tothe 
basion (F). 



polysomnographic studies in children undergoing adenoidectomy and/or tonsillectomy 

TABLE I 

correlation ofab to thevariousindices 

Correlation P 
Index coef.cient ëYí value Signi.cance 

Apnoea index 0.3832 <0.05 Correlation 
signi.cant 
Apnoea-hypopnoea 0.4986 <0.01 Correlation highly 
index signi.cant 
Desaturationindex 0.1933 >0.05 Correlation not 
signi.cant 

Minimum oxygen ñ0.2013 >0.05 Correlation not 
saturation signi.cant 
Bradycardia events 0.2140 >0.05 Correlation not 

signi.cant 
Tachycardia events 0.1078 >0.05 Correlation not 
signi.cant 

(3) Apnoea 
index: number of episodes of apnoea 
perhourofsleep.Thetotal numberof episodes 
of apnoeaobserved weredividedby thenumber 
of hours of sleep. When this index was greater 
than .ve per hour, it was considered as 
obstructive sleep apnoea. 
(4) Apnoea-Hypopnoea index: this was determined 
by adding the total number of episodes of 
apnoea and hypopnoea during the entire sleep 
period and then dividing it by the number of 
hours of sleep. 
(5)Desaturationevent:de.nedasoxygen saturationbelow 
96per cent. 
(6) Desaturation 
index: number of desaturation 
events per hour of sleep. It was determined by 
dividingthetotalnumberofdesaturationevents 
by thenumberofhoursof sleep. 
(7) Bradycardia: heart 
rate less than 40 beats per 
minute. 
(8) Tachycardia: heart rate greater than 120 beats 
per minute. 
OSA was graded as follows.9 
Grade0 NoOSA <5episodesof apnoea/ 
hour 
GradeI MildOSA 5ñ20episodesof 
apnoea/hour 
GradeII ModerateOSA20ñ40 episodesof 
apnoea/hour 
Grade III Severe OSA >40 episodes of apnoea/ 
hour 

TABLE II 

correlation ofcd to thevariousindices 

Correlation P 
Index coef.cient ëYí value Signi.cance 

Apnoea index 
Apnoea-hypopnoea 
0.5276 
0.5127 
<0.01 Correlation highly 
signi.cant 
<0.01 Correlation highly 
Apnoea index 
Apnoea-hypopnoea 
ñ0.3561 
ñ0.3513 
<0.05 
<0.05 
Correlation 
signi.cant 
Correlation 
index 
Desaturation index 0.3740 <0.05 
signi.cant 
Correlation 
index 
Desaturation index ñ0.0594 >0.05 
signi.cant 
Correlation not 
signi.cant signi.cant 
Minimum oxygen 
saturation 
Bradycardia events 
ñ0.2447 
0.3015 
>0.05 
>0.05 
Correlation not 
signi.cant 
Correlation not 
Minimum oxygen 
saturation 
Bradycardia events 
ñ0.0763 
ñ0.1827 
>0.05 
>0.05 
Correlation not 
signi.cant 
Correlation not 
Tachycardia events 0.0909 >0.05 
signi.cant 
Correlation not Tachycardia events ñ0.0659 >0.05 
signi.cant 
Correlation not 
signi.cant signi.cant 


Fig. 4 

Presentingsymptoms inobstructiveandinflammatorygroups. 
SN = Snoring; MB = Mouth breathing; REST = Recurrent 
episodesofsorethroat;SB = Stopsbreathing atnight;DS = 
Difficultyinswallowing;EDS =Excessivedaytimesleepiness; 
AW =Awakensfrequentlyat night;NE=Nocturnalenuresis; 
ABN =Abnormalsleepingpositions;NO=Nasalobstruction; 
PSP = Poor school performance; ES = Ear symptoms; ND = 
Nasal discharge. 

Results and analysis 

A total of 40 patients, in the age group four to 12 
years, who were to undergo adenoidectomy and/or 
tonsillectomy wereenrolledinthe study.They were 
divided into two main groups on the basis of their 
chief presenting complaints viz. Group I ñ obstructive 
and Group II ñ inèammatory. Out of the 30 
patients in Group I, adenoidectomy was performed 
in19,tonsillectomyinthree and adenotonsillectomy 
ineightchildren.Therewere10patientsinGroup II, 
out of whom two underwent adenoidectomy and 
eight underwent tonsillectomy. 

There wasnostatisticallysigni.cantdifferencein 
the age and sex distribution of the two groups. 
Snoring (73.3 per cent) and mouth breathing (66.6 
per cent) emerged as the two main presenting 
symptoms in the obstructive group whereas recurrent 
sorethroat(80per cent) wasthemostcommon 
in the inèammatorygroup(Figure4). 

Themean valueofABwasfoundtobe11.23 mmin 
theobstructive and8.00mmintheinèammatorygroup. 
The studentëtí test showed thatthe differencebetween 
the two groups was highly signi.cant (p<0.01). The 
mean value of CD was 0.72 for group I and 0.45 for 
group II. There was a highly signi.cant difference 
betweenthetwogroups(p<0.01).Themeanvalue of EF 
ingroupI was10.57 mm andgroupII was10.30mm. 
There was no signi.cant difference in values of EF 
between the two groups. 

TABLE III 

correlation ofef to thevariousindices 

Correlation P 
Index coef.cient ëYí value Signi.cance 


a. jain,j.k. sahni 
TABLE IV 

change in the apnoea index scores following surgery in 

the two groups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 
AI 
Gp. I 
Gp. II 
Events/hr. 
11.04 
3.239 
Events/hr. 
2.138 
2.371 
<0.01 
<0.05 
Highly signi.cant 
Signi.cant 

TABLE V 

change in the apnoea-hypopnoea index scores following 
surgery inthetwogroups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 
AHI 
Gp. I 
Gp. II 
Events/hr. 
27.57 
12.39 
Events/hr. 
6.007 
10.89 
<0.01 
>0.05 
Highly signi.cant 
Not signi.cant 

TheKarlPearson correlation coef.cientwasused 
to .nd the correlation between the measurements 
used for assessing adenoid size and the following 
indices-AI, AHI, DI, minimum oxygen saturation, 
number of bradycardia and tachycardia events 
(shown in Tables I, II and III). 

We found a highly signi.cant correlation of CD 
valueswithAI andAHI; signi.cantcorrelationof 
ABwithAIandAHI;andsigni.cant correlationof 
EFwithAHI.Inour series,valuesofCDabove0.64 
correspondedtoanapnoeaindexofgreaterthan.ve 
perhour(OSAS).Wealso found a de.nite correlation 
of CD to the desaturation index. Twenty-two 
out of30patients(73.3 per cent)in groupI and two 
outof10patients(20percent)ingroupIIhad AI>5/ 
hour.Allpatients revertedtograde0OSAfollowing 
surgery. The paired ëtí test was applied to .nd the 
changein AI,AHI,DI,meanand totaldurationof 
apnoea, and minimum oxygen saturation following 
surgery. The results are shown in Tables IVñX 
respectively. 

We found no signi.cant correlation of tonsillar 
hypertrophy grade to apnoea index (AI) (p>0.05), 
apnoea ñ hypopnoea index (AHI) (p>0.05) and 
desaturation index(DI)(p>0.05). 

Discussion 

OSA and obstruction of airways oflesserdegrees of 
severityinchildren areprobablymorecommonthan 
iscurrently realized.Thisismostlikelyduetolack of 

TABLE VI 

change in the desaturation index scores following 
surgery inthetwogroups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 

DI Events/hr. Events/hr. 
Gp. I 22.09 4.312 <0.01 Highly signi.cant 
Gp. II 12.39 10.89 >0.05 Not signi.cant 

TABLE VII 

changeinthemeandurationofapnoeafollowing surgery 
in the two groups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 

Apnoea mean 
duration Minutes Minutes 
Gp. I 17.7 13.38 <0.01 Highly signi.cant 
Gp. II 17.5 16.2 >0.05 Not signi.cant 

TABLE VIII 

changeinthe totaldurationofapnoeafollowingsurgery 

in the two groups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 

Apnoea total 
duration Minutes Minutes 
Gp.I 29.7 4.28 <0.01 Highlysigni.cant 
Gp.II 9.4 3.9 >0.05 Notsigni.cant 

TABLE IX 

change in the percentage of time spent in apnoea 
following surgery in the two groups 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 

Time spent 
in apnoea % % 
Gp.I 5.59 0.82 <0.01 Highlysigni.cant 
Gp.II 1.7 0.84 >0.05 Notsigni.cant 

a convenient mass screening device and agreement 
as to what constitutes signi.cant obstruction. The 
diagnosis and management has assumed greater 
signi.cance as physicians have documented the 
deleterious effects of upper airway obstruction of a 
longer duration.1,2,4,5 Polysomnography can help in 
the assessment of the problem, but constraints of 
manpower, money and time restrict its use in many 
clinical settings, especially in developing countries 
such as India. 

We evaluated 40 children with tonsillar and/or 
adenoid hypertrophy by polysomnography. Thirty 
children (75 per cent) had predominant obstructive 
and10(25 percent)hadpredominant inèammatory 
symptoms. To minimize confounding factors in 
evaluating adenoid and/or tonsil hypertrophy as a 
cause of OSA, the patients with Downís syndrome, 
diagnosed craniofacial anomaly, delayed milestones, 
mental retardation and excessive obesity were 
excludedfrom the study. 

Pre-operativepolysomnography revealedOSA in 
22outof30patientsintheobstructivegroup andtwo 
outof10 inthe inèammatorygroup,thus indicating 
the importance of parental history. We found a 
highly signi.cant correlation between the size of 
adenoid and the size of the nasopharynx (value CD 
in our series), with the grade of OSA. There was a 
highlysigni.cant correlationofCD toAI(p<0.01). 
High AI scores and desaturation and corpulmonale,
1,2 thus highlighting the importance of this 
observation.2,4,5 We found that all patients with a 
CD value above 0.64 has OSA. These observations 
suggest that, in the non-availability of polysomnography, 
children with a CD value above 0.64 in 

TABLE X 

comparisonoftheminimumoxygen saturationrecordedin 
the two groups before and after surgery 

Pre-op Post-op p Signi.cance 
Minimum oxygen 
saturation 
Gp. I 72.3 88.27 <0.01 Highly signi.cant 
Gp. II 79.7 81.2 >0.05 Not signi.cant 


polysomnographic studies in children undergoing adenoidectomy and/or tonsillectomy 

otherwise normal children should be considered for 
surgery,althoughfurtherclinicaltrialsareneededto 
validate this viewpoint. 

Although signi.cant relationship of absolute adenoid 
hypertrophy, as expressed byAB andEF, with 
AI were observed, these relationships were not very 
consistent andhence a signi.cantpredictive value 
could not be assigned to these parameters. But we 
found that severity of OSA increased with 
AB>9 mm and EF<7mm was associated with 
CD>0.64. 

There was no correlation of the degree of OSA 
observed in our patients to the grade of tonsillar 
hypertrophy, i.e. there were some patients with 
gradeI andIIhypertrophy withsigni.cantOSA, and 
on the other hand, there were some patients with 
grade III hypertrophy and no OSA. 

All patients reverted to grade 0 OSA following 
surgery. In the obstructive group, the mean AI was 
11.04/hour which reduced to 2.138/hour following 
surgery,whichishighlysigni.cant andis consistent 
with other studies.3,6,10ñ13 

We found ahighly signi.cant reduction indesaturation 
index scores following surgery in the 
obstructive group as reported by other authors.10,11 
Whenpatientswhounderwent adenoidectomyalone 
and those who underwent adenotonsillectomy were 
compared, the reduction in DI scores was similar in 
the two groups, whereas in the patients who underwenttonsillectomyalone,
nosigni.cant reductionin 
DI scores was seen. 

Conclusion 

Theresultsof this study suggestthatthereisahigh 
incidence of obstructive sleep apnoea in patients of 
adenotonsillar hypertrophy especially in those who 
present with obstructive symptoms, that are relieved 
following surgery. The degree of OSA is highly 
correlatedtothe relative sizeofadenoidtissuetothe 
nasopharyngealairway(valueCDinourstudy) and 
for values of CD above 64 per cent, surgical 
intervention should be considered; although further 
clinical trials are needed to validate this viewpoint. 
Early surgical intervention may also prevent development 
of complications. 

References 

1 TalbotAR,RobertsonLW. Cardiacfailurewithtonsiland 
adenoid hypertrophy. ArchOtolaryngol 1973;98:277ñ81 

2 Potsic WP, Wetmore RF. Sleep disorders and airway 
obstruction in children. Otolaryngol ClinNorthAm 1990; 
23:651ñ3 

3 MoserRJ3rd,RajagopalKR.Obstructivesleepapnoeain 
adults with tonsillar hypertrophy. Arch Intern Med 
1987;147:1265ñ7 

4 BrouilletteRT,WeeseMayerDE,HuntCE.Disordersof 
breathing during sleep in the pediatric population. Semin 
RespirMed 1988;9:594ñ606 

5 Marcus CL, McColley SA, Carroll JL, Loughlin GM, 
SmithPL, SchwartzAR.Upper airway collapsibility with 
children with OSA syndrome. J Appl Physiol 1994;77: 
918ñ24 

6 MangatD,OrrWC, SmithRO.Sleep apnoea, hypersomnolence 
and upper airway obstruction secondary to 
adenotonsillar enlargement. Arch Otolaryngol 1977;103: 
383ñ6 

7 Potsic WP. Comparison of polysomnography and sonography 
for assessing regularity of respiration during sleep 
of adenotonsillar hypertrophy. Laryngoscope 1987;97: 
1430ñ7 

8 Shintani T, Asakura K, Kataura A. The effect of 
adenotonsillectomy in children with OSA. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol1998;44:51ñ8 

9 Bailey CM, Croft CB. Sleep apnoea. In: Adams DA, 
Cinnamond MJ(eds.), Scott-Brownís Otolaryngology 6th 
edn.,Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann,1997;6/20/1ñ12 

10 Croft CB, Brockbank MJ, Wright A, Swanston AR. 
Obstructive sleep apnoea in children undergoing routine 
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. Clin Otolaryngol 
15:307ñ14 

11 Eliaschar I, Lavie P, Halperin E, Gordon C, Alroy G. 
Sleep apnoeic episodes as indicationsfor adenotonsillectomy. 
Arch Otolaryngol106:492ñ6 

12 FrankY,KravathRE,PollakCP,WeitzmanED.OSAand 
its therapy, clinical andpolysomnographicmanifestations. 
Pediatrics 1983;71:737ñ42 

13 Orr WC, Martin RJ. OSA associated with tonsillar 
hypertrophyin adults. ArchInternMed 1981;141:990ñ2 

Address for correspondence: 
DrAnubhavJain, 
Pocket EA-433,Maya Enclave, 
New Delhi110-064, 
India. 


DrA.Jaintakesresponsibilityfortheintegrityof the content 
of thepaper. 
Competinginterests:None declared 


