Improving Pediatric Compliance with Positive Airway Pressure Therapy: the 
Impact of Behavioral Intervention 

Kristine L. Koontz, PhD1; Keith J. Slifer, PhD1; Marilyn D. Cataldo, MA1; Carole L. Marcus, MBBCh2 

1The Kennedy Krieger Institute and Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine; 2The Eudowood Division of Pediatric Respiratory Sciences, Johns 

Hopkins University 

Study Objective: The purposes of this study were (1) to describe behavior 
interventions provided to improve compliance with positive airway 
pressure (PAP) therapies in children with obstructive sleep apnea, (2) to 
survey physician and caregiver satisfaction with these interventions, and 

(3) to present preliminary outcome data on the effects of these interventions. 
Design: Retrospective, descriptive analysis. 
Setting: Pediatric psychology consultation service at a university-affiliated 
rehabilitation hospital. 
Participants: 20 children (aged 1-17 years) with obstructive sleep apnea, 
referred by physicians for noncompliance with PAP. 
Interventions: Patients self-selected into 1 of 3 groups: (1) a group 
receiving a 1.5-hour consultation and recommendation session (CR+), (2) 
a group receiving consultation and recommendations plus a course of 
behavior therapy (BT), and (3) a group for whom behavior therapy was 
recommended after the consultation and recommendations, but the family 
did not follow-up (CR-). 
Results: Prior to behavior intervention, none of the children were consistently 
wearing the PAP equipment. After intervention, 75% of children 
who received behavior intervention (CR+ and BT groups) successfully tolerated 
PAP with increased hours of documented usage. This was in contrast 
to children whose families declined recommended behavior therapy 
(CR- group), of whom 0% increased their usage of PAP. High satisfaction 
ratings were obtained from referring physicians and patient caregivers for 
children in the CR+ and BT groups. 
Conclusions: The results are encouraging and support the importance of 
behavior analysis and therapy for increasing compliance and making the 
benefits of PAP available to a greater number of children. 
Citation: Koontz KL; Slifer KJ; Cataldo MD; Marcus CL. Improving pediatric 
compliance with positive airway pressure therapy: the impact of 
behavioral intervention. SLEEP 2003;26(8):1010-5. 

INTRODUCTION 
the mask, physiologic arousal from struggling, or both. They begin to 
experience anxiety and distress at the mention or sight of the equipment,

OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA (OSA) IS A SIGNIFICANT CAUSE 

and they learn that physical and verbal resistance to PAP can cause the 

OF MORBIDITY IN CHILDREN WITH COMPLICATIONS, 

caregiver to delay or give up on the use of PAP. 

INCLUDING FAILURE TO THRIVE, DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY, 

Behavior analysis and therapy techniques have been used to teach

AND COR PULMONALE.1 Although surgical procedures such as ade


children behaviors that facilitate the clinical management of their medi


notonsillectomy are successful in alleviating OSA in many children with 

cal conditions (eg, decreasing abnormal movements in neurologic disor


adenotonsillar hypertrophy, some children have persistent OSA after the 

ders,5 teaching tracheostomy self-care6 or self-catheterization,7 or train


operation.2 These children, like those who have other predisposing fac


ing motion suppression for neuroimaging8 or radiation treatments9).

tors for OSA (eg, craniofacial anomalies, neuromuscular weakness, or 

Pediatric pulmonary and behavioral psychology specialists have used

obesity) require alternative treatments. Nasal continuous positive airway 

behavior training to improve adherence to PAP in 20 young and /or 

pressure (CPAP) was introduced nearly 2 decades ago and is now wide-

developmentally delayed children with OSA. This article describes the 

ly used with adults who have OSA.3 Despite encouraging results with 

behavior program and presents preliminary efficacy-outcome data along 

adults, positive airway pressure (PAP) is rarely used with younger chil


with results of physician and caregiver satisfaction surveys.

dren or those with developmental disabilities. A 1995 study4 examining 
the safety and efficacy of CPAP found that it was safe for use with chil-

METHODS

dren and effective in 86% of children with OSA. When CPAP was not 
successful, it was because of poor compliance in 92% of the cases. Patient Sample and Setting 
To benefit from PAP, the patient must wear a snuggly fitting mask that 

The patients were 20 physician-referred children with OSA from 2 

forces air under pressure into the nostrils during both inhalation and 

major urban medical centers. All were prescribed bilevel PAP and 

exhalation when sleeping. Positive airway pressure can be particularly 

referred for behavior training to increase PAP compliance. These “dif


difficult for children with developmental delays, and for those with anx


ficult” cases represented approximately 10% of the pediatric pulmonary

iety or behavior problems. These children often verbally and physically 

patients prescribed PAP for the management of OSA. Their characteris


resist caregivers’ efforts to put on the mask, and they may develop con-

tics are presented in Table 1. The caregivers were mothers (65%), grand


ditioned anxiety because of poorly fitting equipment and repeated asso


parents (20%), fathers (10%), and foster parents (5%). Family ethnicity

ciation of the sight, sound, and sensation of PAP with discomfort from 

was African American (55%), Caucasian (30%), Hispanic (5%), and 
other (10%). Of the 20 patients referred, 55% received behavior therapy 
(BT), 30% received brief behavior consultation (1 session lasting 1.5

Disclosure Statement 

hours) and recommendations (CR+), and 15% declined behavior thera-

Dr. Carole Marcus received unrelated support for research from ResMed, Inc. 

py when it was recommended after brief behavior consultation (CR-). 
There was a trend for CR+ patients to be younger than BT patients (XCR+

Submitted for publication January 2003 

= 3.83, SD = 4.8; XBT = 8.6, SD = 4.9; P = .06). Behavior treatment was

Accepted for publication August 2003 

provided in a hospital or clinic room or at home using the prescribed

Address correspondence to: Kristine Koontz, Hempfield Behavioral Health, 251 

PAP equipment. 

Wiconisco Street, Harrisburg, PA 17111; Tel: 717-221-8004 x 200; 
E-mail: Kkoontzhca@cs.com 

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 
1010 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 


Measures 

Behavior Assessment 

Each child was observed during an inpatient session or outpatient 
visit. The caretaker was asked to use her or his customary child behavior 
management strategies and to put the PAP equipment on the child as 
trained by pulmonary, home health agency staff, or both. A task analysis 
of child behavior necessary for PAP compliance was developed by 
breaking this complex behavior into an ordered sequence of component 
steps. Child compliance with each step was recorded, and the percentage 
of steps with the child complying was calculated. A copy of the PAP 
Task Analysis is available from the authors and is included in the electronic 
version of this paper (Appendix A). 

Meter Readings of PAP Usage 

A retrospective analysis of patient charts was conducted. The mean 
hours per day of wearing PAP as read from the equipment usage meter 
and documented in the chart was calculated for 3 time points: (1) before 
behavior intervention, (2) during the behavior intervention, and (3) after 
the behavior intervention (mean posttreatment assessment interval was 

25.7 months, SD = 22.9). 
Table 1—Patient Diagnosis and Levels of Functioning 

Participant # 
Medical Estimated Age, y PAP 
Diagnoses Cognitive setting, 
& Stressors* Function cm H2O 

Inpatient 

1 
Jeunes Borderline 6 8/4 
syndrome, 
kidney failure, 
legally blind 

2 Chronic Average 1 10/4 
pneumonia 
3 Myelomeningocele, Borderline 13 12/6 

obesity 
4 Myelomeningocele Borderline 14 8/2 
5 Cerebrovascular Average 8 10/4 

accident 

Outpatient 

6 
Achondroplasia Average 2 8/4 

7 
Attention deficit Average 7 14/8 
disorder, 
oppositional 
defiant disorder 

8 — Average 1 10/4 
9 — Average 2 8/2 
10 Myelomeningocele, Mild MR 2 10/4 

acute stress reaction 
11 Treacher Collins Moderate MR 9 8/0 
syndrome 

12 
Turner syndrome, Mild MR 1 12/8 
nasopharyngeal 
stenosis, 
hearing loss 

13 
Communication Average 4 6/0 

disorder 
14 Down syndrome Moderate MR 5 10/6 
15 Cerebral palsy Severe MR 15 12/6 
16 Chronic heart and Borderline 3 6/0 

lung failure 
17 Down syndrome Moderate MR 12 14/8 
18 Cerebral palsy Severe MR 6 12/6 
19 Cerebrovascular Moderate MR 7 4/0 

accident; 
Down syndrome 
20 Down syndrome Moderate MR 13 14/8 

*diagnoses in addition to OSA. 
PAP refers to positive airway pressure; MR, mental retardation. 


Caregiver and Physician Satisfaction 

The Caregiver Questionnaire had 8 items. It was developed by the 
authors to measure caregiver perception of child behavior and medical 
status, as well as the level of intrusiveness and difficulty of the recommended 
intervention. Physician satisfaction with whether or not the 
behavior intervention resulted in adequate PAP compliance was assessed 
using categorical ratings (successful or unsuccessful) of compliance and 
treatment efficacy. (The caregiver questionnaire is available from the 
authors and is included in the electronic version of this paper (Appendix 
B). 

Intervention Procedures 

Behavior Consultation 

Initial compliance data were obtained during a behavior consultation 
session. This consisted of a structured interview and direct observation 
of the caregiver’s attempt to place the equipment on the child. The caregiver 
was asked to identify the child’s favorite activities that might be 
used to relax, distract, and motivate the child (small prizes, snacks, 
games, and videotapes). Individualized behavior recommendations were 
provided in writing to the caregivers. The caregivers were instructed to 
implement the recommendations for 1 week and to record notes on the 
child’s cooperation. The need for ongoing behavior therapy was determined 
based on the results of this initial trial. Behavior therapy was recommended 
for any caregiver who was unsuccessful at implementing the 
behavior recommendations. A retrospective analysis of patients revealed 
that after the behavior consultation, children and caregivers could be categorized 
as (1) those who effectively implemented the intervention 
(CR+), (2) those who were not able to effectively implement the intervention 
and who declined recommended behavior therapy (CR-), and (3) 
those who completed the recommended behavior therapy (BT). The 
CR+ and CR- groups received only 1 session, which included the behavior 
consultation and presentation of recommendations. The BT group 
averaged 6 sessions (SD = 3.1) with multiple sessions conducted within 
a 1-hour appointment. 

Behavior Therapy 

Children in the BT group participated in behavior-rehearsal sessions 
during which PAP-related stimuli were presented with gradually increasing 
proximity and duration but were also associated with positive events. 
The therapy techniques described below were integrated within the 
rehearsal sessions. 

Positive reinforcement refers to systematic presentation of a stimulus 
or event contingent on a target behavior resulting in a subsequent 
increase in the frequency of that target behavior. Differential positive 
reinforcement involved consistently reinforcing some behaviors (eg, 
cooperation with PAP) with praise and not praising others (eg, removal 
of the mask). At the start of each session, the child was asked to choose 
1 from an assortment of prizes or activities to earn by “listening, following 
instructions, and not trying to take off the mask.” Praise was provided 
for each step completed in the PAP task analysis. For younger or 
developmentally delayed children with a limited attention span and difficulty 
delaying gratification, an immediate and tangible reinforcer 
(token or sticker) was awarded, along with praise for completion of each 
step (stickers were exchanged for the prize at the end of the appointment). 
Gradually, the requirements for reinforcement were increased 
until the child willingly got into position, helped to put on the equipment, 
and quietly tolerated the mask and air pressure until either falling 
asleep or the session was ended by the therapist. 

Graduated exposure was conducted by presenting the PAP equipment 
and its application 1 step at a time according to the sequence outlined in 
the PAP task analysis and at a pace that challenged but did not overly 
distress the child. 

Counter conditioning was conducted by prompting and praising the 
child’s participation in a favorite and distracting activity (music, conver-

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 
1011 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 


sation, stories, movie, or computer game). The activity was used to relax 
the child, then potentially distressing PAP equipment and sensations 
were presented 1 at a time while praising the child’s tolerance of this 
stimulation. This planned pairing of comforting and feared stimuli was 
continued until the patient comfortably tolerated all of the sensations and 
steps in the PAP task analysis. 

Escape or avoidance prevention strategies were implemented by the 
therapist or caregiver to teach the child that attempts to avoid or remove 
the PAP equipment no longer would be effective. The child’s vocal 
protests were ignored. The therapist, speaking in a calm voice, intermittently 
reassured the child that “you can do it, you will be OK, etc.” The 
child’s attempts to remove the mask were physically interrupted, and the 
child’s hands were directed away from the mask and toward the activity 
being used for counter conditioning. If the child removed the mask, it 
was immediately put back in place by the therapist or caregiver. 

Caregiver and Staff Training 

The therapist implemented treatment during initial sessions when the 
child was most resistant to the PAP. At first, the caregiver and therapist 
worked as a team with the caregiver following instructions and demonstrations 
by the therapist. As the caregiver became proficient with the 
routine, the therapist slowly withdrew from the hands-on aspect of the 
treatment. Caregivers were trained to collect data on the child’s compliance 
with PAP, which provided a means of checking staff or caregiver 
compliance and identifying the parts of the protocol that were especially 
difficult for the caregiver. The form also prompted and guided the 
caregiver’s behavior in the absence of the therapist. Written behavior 
guidelines for helping children tolerate PAP were also given to caregivers. 
This information is available from the authors and is included in 
the electronic version of this paper (Appendix C). 

Statistical Analyses 

This study was a retrospective analysis involving a small number of 
participants and is therefore limited in possible type and interpretation of 

analyses. Descriptive statistics (means and SD) were initially used to test 
for between-group differences on demographic variables. Mean hours of 
equipment usage were analyzed using a repeated measures analysis of 
variance and Tukey posthoc difference testing (P < .05) when appropriate. 


RESULTS 

Figure 1 presents mean hours of compliance per night recorded at 
baseline, during treatment, and after treatment. Patients in both BT and 
CR+ groups displayed clinically significant gains in the amount of time 
PAP was worn. None of the 3 groups differed in mean hours of PAP 
usage at baseline, and the CR+ and BT groups did not differ significantly 
during the treatment and posttreatment phases (Tukey HSD test > 
.05). The CR+ group displayed significantly longer PAP usage at posttreatment 
when compared to the CR- group (Tukey HSD test < .05). 
Table 2 shows that after treatment, all patients in the CR+ group were 
compliant with PAP and displaying good OSA management (OSA had 
resolved in 1 patient). Of the BT patients, 8 of the 11 (73%) reportedly 
wore the PAP whenever sleeping. Of these 8, 1 family elected tracheostomy 
despite the child’s adequate compliance (participant #7), and 
1 child no longer required PAP after a follow-up sleep study indicated 
that the OSA had resolved (participant #9). Of the 3 BT children with 
poor compliance, 2 displayed increases in PAP usage but not enough to 
effectively manage their OSA, and 1 child died in a house fire. 
Compliance for the CR- group was low. Of the 3 children in the CR-
group, 1 child’s OSA was reportedly resolved (participant #13), 1 child 
died of respiratory failure (participant #16), and 1 child remained on 
PAP but continued to display poor OSA management. 

The second column in Table 2 distinguishes between sessions required 
to initially obtain child compliance (number shown in parentheses) and 
the total number of sessions. On average, children receiving BT 
achieved compliance within 3 rehearsal sessions conducted during 1 to 
3 appointments. 

Physicians’ and therapists’ ratings were highest for patients receiving 
CR+, with 100% of physicians expressing satisfaction and therapists rat


ing both child cooperation and parent fol


low-through as satisfactory for all. 

Physicians’ ratings of PAP usage were sat


isfactory for 8 of 11 (73%) of the BT par


ticipants. For the 3 participants receiving 

poor ratings (# 4, 11, and 17), the behavior 

therapist had recorded the child’s skills as 

satisfactory but caregiver follow-through 

was poor. Only 1 (33%) of the CR- partic


ipants received a satisfactory rating of 

PAP usage from the physician, and the 

child’s OSA had resolved. 

Of the 15 caregivers who experienced 
success, 12 responded to the satisfaction 
survey, and 83% of them reported following 
all of the behavior recommendations. 
They also reported immediate changes in 
their child’s behavior after she or he had 
worn the PAP on a regular basis, including 
improvement in mood (92%), increased 
alertness (83%), more restful sleep (75%), 
and seemingly enhanced learning abilities 
(58%). Of the 5 cases rated as poor by 
physicians, 3 caregivers responded. Two 
of these reported difficulties following the 
behavior recommendations and did not 
establish a nighttime routine or a reinforcement 
program. These 2 caregivers 
reported that if their child removed the 
mask, they often did not replace it in order 
to avoid a physical and emotional struggle. 

Figure 1— The 3 groups included (1) a group receiving a 1.5-hour consultation and recommendation session (CR+), (2) a group 
receiving consultation and recommendations plus a course of behavior therapy (BT), and (3) a group for whom behavior therapy was 
recommended after the consultation and recommendations but the family did not follow-up (CR-). Repeated measures analysis of 
variance (F = 33.7; P < .001). The posttreatment Tukey HSD for CR+ vs CR- was < .05; all other comparisons were NS. 
SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1012 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 



The third caregiver reported that implementing the PAP routine produced 
an “emotional struggle” and required “too much time.” Therefore 
the family had chosen surgery for their child. 

DISCUSSION 

Data from pediatric pulmonary clinic records, behavior assessments, 
and caregiver reports were examined to determine the efficacy of behavior 
interventions targeting PAP compliance in children with OSA. Prior 
to behavior intervention, none of the children were consistently wearing 
the PAP equipment. After intervention, 75% of children who received 
behavior intervention (CR+ and BT groups) were able to successfully 
tolerate PAP and evidenced increased documented hours of usage. This 
was in contrast to children whose families declined recommended 
behavior therapy (CR- group), of whom 0% increased their successful 
usage of PAP. Both the CR+ and BT patients displayed adequate posttreatment 
compliance, with patients averaging approximately 8 hours 
and 6 hours per night of PAP use, respectively. Compliance with PAP 
appeared to be influenced by the fit of the equipment, the child’s adaptation 
to the equipment, and caregiver follow-through when the child 
became distressed and removed the equipment. 

Compliance leading to effective OSA management was trained in a 
short period of time, and some patients achieved compliance with only 
90 minutes of behavior consultation and written recommendations. 
These results are especially encouraging because the patients in this 
study were the most challenging of cases (those who had been referred 
for behavior intervention for PAP noncompliance). If routinely provided 
prospectively, behavior training may prevent compliance problems for 
many children. 

This was not an experimentally controlled study. Families were not 
randomly assigned to groups but, instead, self-selected the behavior ser


vices they would accept. On average, children in the CR+ group were 
younger and appeared to have less-challenging behavior problems (parents 
of children with more-challenging behavior problems were offered 
additional behavior therapy sessions). Younger children may respond 
more quickly to behavior intervention because caregivers can implement 
the recommendations more effectively with younger children who are 
easier to physically guide and to block from pulling off the mask. The 
greater mean hours of usage for the CR+ compared to the BT group 
might have been a function of younger children sleeping more hours. 
Only a few caregivers refused BT. One common characteristic across 
these caregivers was their statements that the child really did not need 
the PAP, even after being told about the risks associated with untreated 
OSA. 

Physicians were enthusiastic about the results of the CR+ group, with 
100% of all cases described as successful. The CR+ is appealing for 
many reasons. First, it required only 90 minutes of consulting time, was 
relatively inexpensive (approximately $200-$250), and was noninvasive 
and children typically enjoyed the sessions. The BT was also highly 
regarded, and despite the fact that children in this group likely had more 
pervasive behavior problems, 73% of the cases were rated as satisfactory. 
The BT requires more time (and expense) but appears to be an effective 
alternative for families who require more time or assistance in learning 
to manage their child’s resistance to PAP. Results from the CR-
group indicated that there are some patients and families (15% of our 
sample) who could benefit from BT but will decline the services. 

In most cases, the caregivers were receptive to and satisfied with the 
behavior interventions. They also reported positive changes in their 
child’s sleep, mood, and functioning. Caregivers in the CR+ group differed 
from those in the BT group in terms of difficulty implementing the 
protocols and the amount of time they spent in treatment. When compared 
to the BT group, the CR+ group experienced progress with treat-

Table 2—Positive Airway Pressure Compliance, Ratings and Patient Status as a Function of Intervention 

PAP Compliance 
Group Participant # Sessions, no.* Preintervention, Postintervention, Child Parent/Staff Management Patient 
h/night† h/night† Cooperation Follow through of OSA status 
and Skills 

BT 
1 
3 
4 
5 
7 
9 
10 
1117 
15 
20 
10 (4) 
7 (4) 
9 (6) 
8 (3) 
2 
7 (3) 
2 
9 (4) 
5 (2) 
2 
3 (1) 
0 
1.5 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4 
8 
5 
0 
6 
7 
12.7 
8.5 
1.5 
3 
4.5 
8.5 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
poor 
S 
S 
S 
S 
poor 
poor 
S 
S 
S 
S 
poor 
S 
S 
S 
S 
poor 
poor 
S 
S 
Tolerating PAP 
Tolerating PAP 
Deceased 
Tolerating PAP 
Tracheostomy 
OSA resolved 
Tolerating PAP 
surgery 
UPPP surgery 
Tolerating PAP 
Tolerating PAP 
CR+ S S S 
2 
6 
8 
12 
14 
18 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
2.8 
2 
3 
2.5 
9 
10.5 
11 
6 
7.5 
7.5 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
S 
Tolerating PAP 
Tolerating PAP 
OSA resolved 
Tolerating PAP 
Tolerating PAP 
Tolerating PAP 
CR-

13 1 0 0 unknown unknown S OSA resolved 
16 1 2 0 S poor poor Deceased 
19 1 8 2 unknown unknown poor Poor 
Compliance 

*The number in parentheses is the number of sessions necessary for the child to become 100% cooperative with positive airway pressure (PAP), the other number 
is the total behavior therapy sessions provided. 

†For preintervention and postintervention columns, the data are displayed by mean number of hours per night that PAP was worn during sleep hours. Data for 
hours spent wearing the PAP were taken from clinic meter readings. 
OSA refers to obstructive sleep apnea; BT, the group receiving consultation and recommendations plus a course of behavior therapy; S, satisfactory; UPPP, uvulopalatopharyngoplasty; 
CR+, the group receiving a 1.5-hour consultation and recommendation session; CR-, the group for whom behavior therapy was recommended 
after the consultation and recommendations but the family did not follow-up. 
ment almost immediately, 
whereas the 
BT group typically 
experienced success 
after 2 to 3 sessions. 
The majority of 
caregivers from 
both groups reported 
that the most 
helpful aspect of the 
program was “individually 
tailored 
treatment.” In addition 
to treatment for 
PAP, BT caregivers 
reported valuing the 
support and training 
of the behavior psychologist 
for general 
child behavior-
management problems 
(eg, tantrums, 
noncompliance with 
adult demands). A 
majority of caregivers 
in both the 
CR+ group and BT 
groups reported that 
the most difficult 
recommendation to 
follow was “setting 
up and maintaining 
a reinforcement system” 
for their child. 
The CR-group 

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 1013 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 


reported their difficulties as “recommended strategies were too difficult 
to put into place with my family,” “partner would not follow techniques,” 
“child displayed no progress, so I discontinued protocol,” and 
“other issues demanded my full attention.” 

Conclusions drawn from this retrospective descriptive analysis are 
limited by the small sample size and lack of random assignment of participants 
to groups. Furthermore, measuring compliance using a machine 
definition (ie, the PAP hour meter) may overestimate usage if the PAP 
machine is operating even when the patient is not wearing it. Although 
these data were cross-referenced with chart notes, caregiver reports, and 
physician subjective ratings, it is possible that compliance was lower 
than reported. 

These clinical outcome data support the use of behavior intervention 
for increasing child and caregiver usage of PAP. These approaches 
appear to be effective with a broad range of pediatric patients regardless 
of age, presence of preexisting behavior problems, or developmental disabilities. 
The results support the utility of behavior analysis and therapy 
for improving compliance, thereby making the benefits of PAP available 
to a greater number of children. To further document the efficacy of 
behavior methods in improving compliance, future studies should utilize 
a larger, randomized, prospective design with a diverse group of children 
with sleep-related respiratory disturbances and should systematically 
track the cost-effectiveness of such interventions so that evidence-based 
literature will exist to support the use of these strategies. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

This study was funded, in part, by the Kennedy Krieger Institute and 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Mental 
Retardation/Developmental Disabilities Research Center Grant (NICHD 
No. HD24061) 

REFERENCES 

1. 
Brouillette, TR, Fernbach, SK, Hunt CE. Obstructive sleep apnea in infants and children. 
J Pediatr 1982; 100:31-40. 
2. 
Suen JS, Arnold JE, Brooks LJ. Adenotonsillectomy for treatment of obstructive sleep 
apnea in children. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995; 121:525-30. 
3. 
Sullivan CE, Grunstein RR. Continuous positive airway pressure in sleep-disordered 
breathing. In: Kryger MH, Roth T, Dement WC, eds. Principles and Practice of Sleep 
Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994:694-705. 
4. 
Marcus CL, Davidson-Ward, SL, Mallory GB, et al. Use of nasal continuous positive airway 
pressure as treatment of childhood obstructive sleep apnea. J Pediatr 1995;127:8894. 
5. 
Parker LH, Cataldo MF, Bourland G, et al. Operant treatment of orofacial dysfunction in 
neuromuscular disorders. J Appl Behav Anal 1984;17:413-27. 
6. 
Derrickson J, Neef N, Parrish J. Teaching self-administration of suctioning to children 
with tracheostomies. J Appl Behav Anal 1993;42:469-70. 
7. 
Hagopian LP, Thompson RH. Reinforcement of compliance with respiratory treatment 
in a child with cystic fibrosis. J Appl Behav Anal 1999;32:233-6. 
8. 
Slifer KJ, Cataldo MF, Cataldo MD, et al. Behavior analysis of motion control for pediatric 
neuroimaging. J Appl Behav Anal 1993;24:563-70. 
9. 
Slifer KJ, Bucholtz JD, Cataldo, MD. Behavioral training of motion control in young 
children undergoing radiation treatment without sedation. J Pediatr Onc Nurs 
1994;11:55-63. 
APPENDIX A 

Bilevel PAP Task Analysis 

1. 
The child sits on bed or stretcher. 
2. 
The child cooperates with having the Bilevel PAP cap placed on the back of head. 
3. 
The child lies in the supine position on the bed/stretcher. 
4. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is 
placed in position on the face for 5 seconds. 
5. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is 
placed in position on the face for 10 seconds. 
6. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is 
placed in position on the face for 1 minute. 
7. 
The child remains supine and calm while one side of the mask is attached to the cap. 
**Prior to next step, the mask will need to be connected to the tube and the tube will 
need to be connected to the machine. 
8. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 3 seconds. 
9. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 5 seconds. 
10. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 10 seconds. 
11. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 1 minute 
12. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask is placed in position on the face and 
is connected to the cap on both sides. 
13. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of 
the cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 1 minute. 
14. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of 
the cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 5 minutes. 
15. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of 
the cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 10 minutes. 
16. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of 
the cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 15 minutes. 
APPENDIX B 

Caregiver Satisfaction Questionnaire 

1) 
Is your child still wearing the Bilevel PAP? 

(If yes): How are they doing? 
WEARING Bilevel PAP: 
a) Every night 
b) 3-5 nights a week 
c) Less than 3 nights each week 


(If no): Why? 
(Permit caregiver to generate. Sample responses include: OSA corrected through surgery; 
was too difficult to get them to wear it, so we stopped; physician said s/he no longer needed 
to wear it…) 


2) 
Did you notice any changes in your child’s behavior after s/he was tolerating the Bilevel 
PAP regularly? 

a) Sleeping better 
b) Improved mood 
c) Learning more 
d) Seemed more alert 
e) No differences noted 

3) 
Do you believe you could have been successful in getting _____(child)____ to wear the 
Bilevel PAP without our help? 
Yes No (allow caregiver to explain response) 

Level of Intrusiveness 

4) 
Were you able to follow the recommendations given by the behavioral therapist? For 

example, were you able to: 
a) Set up a bedtime routine for your child 
b) Set up reinforcement system 
c) Put the mask back on each time your child removed it 

(If not): Which of the following best describes why you believe it was difficult to use the 
Bilevel PAP? 

a) Life is too hectic/other issues demanded my full attention 
b) Recommended strategies were too difficult to put into place with my family 
c) Techniques were too time-consuming 
d) Partner would not follow techniques 
e) Child displayed no progress, so I gave up 


5) What was the most helpful aspect of our service? 
a) Support with problem behaviors 
b) Access to/increased communication with medical personnel 
c) Education about Bilevel PAP 
d) Individually-tailored treatment for my child and family 
e) Other (________________________________________) 


6) What was the least helpful aspect of our program? 
a) Took too much time to complete 
b) Difficult to get an appointment 
c) Other (________________________________________) 


7) 
Do you believe that the behavioral psychology department provides an important service 
for patients needing to wear Bilevel PAP? 

a) Yes, definitely 
b) Yes, for the most part 
c) No, not really that important 
d) No, not at all important 

8) 
How can we improve our service? 
Let parent/caregiver generate…. 

Is your child in school? 
What kind of school program does your child attend? (special education/regular programming) 


SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 
1014 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 


APPENDIX C 

General Behavior Guidelines for Helping Children Tolerate CPAP/Bilevel 
PAP 

These are general guidelines to be followed at home. Persistent noncompliance may indicate 
additional problems. If this is the case, it is strongly recommended that a consult be arranged 
with a behavioral psychologist or someone trained to analyze and change behavior. 

1) 
It is very important to develop a routine whenever your child is getting ready for sleep. 
This includes putting on pajamas, placing him/her in a crib or bed, playing with a special 
toy, and other activities that already have been established. 

2) 
Turn on machine as soon as you enter his/her room. 

3) 
When your child is in bed, rub his/her arms, and talk in a low voice to create a calm and 
relaxing environment. 

4) 
Present the mask with the cap attached in front of your child. Never place any of the 
equipment on from behind. The goal is to teach your child that this equipment is part 
of bedtime routine so it’s important that everything is predictable and done consistently. 

5) 
Slowly place the mask on the nose and then place the cap on the head. Fasten the strap 
to the mask (only undo one strap so it can be fastened quickly when the cap is placed on 
your child’s head). Depending upon your child’s age, it may be developmentally appropriate 
for your child to be involved in placing the mask or adjusting it. Older children 
often appreciate the opportunity to assist in their own medical care. 

6) 
If your child struggles, use one hand to block his/her hands and keep them down. With 
the other hand, keep the mask over his/her nose. As s/he starts to calm down, slowly lift 
your hand and proceed with putting on the cap and place the mask so it is in the proper 
position over the nose. In the case of older children, it might not be possible to effectively 
physically block them from removing the mask. Most importantly, if the mask is 
removed, it must be put on again immediately. 

7) 
Your child may cry when the equipment is placed on him/her. However if s/he is not 
grabbing at the equipment and begins to breathe thru the mask when it is put on, you 
should begin rubbing his/her arms and speak softly. You can place a plush toy around 
his/her arms when the equipment is on and your child is calm. For older children, it is 
suggested that you engage them in a favorite quiet activity (e.g., reading a favorite book, 
or watching a preferred movie or TV program). Such quiet time activities are not only a 
reward for tolerating the mask, but may also act as a useful distraction. 

8) 
If your child struggles again (which will probably occur in the beginning), do not look 
directly at him/her, animate your face, or speak to him/her. Try to keep a neutral face and 
proceed with blocking your child’s arms and get the equipment on him/her quickly and 
safely. 

9) 
When the equipment is on again, then you can rub your child’s arms, smile and soothe 
your child. Proceed with the favorite activity (e.g., reading books, talking, etc) only 
when s/he is not touching the mask. 

10) If the equipment comes off because your child rolls or pulls it off while s/he sleeps, follow 
the procedure as outlines above. It is critical that the equipment gets placed back on 
your child after each time it comes off regardless of whether s/he removed it or it comes 
off during movement while asleep. CPAP and bilevel PAP machines can be equipped 
with an alarm that will sound when the mask comes off. Many caregivers have found 
these alarms quite helpful in monitoring compliance and ensuring that the mask is 
replaced immediately if it happens to be removed. 

11) Lastly, be sure that your child knows that only the caregiver is to remove the mask. For 
older children, or children who are physically able to safely remove the masks, you may 
make arrangements that they can take the mask off, but only after a caregiver instructs 
them to do so. 

SLEEP, Vol. 26, No. 8, 2003 
1015 Improving Pediatric Compliance With PAP—Koontz et al 


