Pediatric Pulmonology 27:267–272 (1999) 

Evaluation of Home Audiotapes as an Abbreviated Test 
for Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome (OSAS) 
in Children 


Carin Lamm, MD,1* John Mandeli, PhD,2 and Meyer Kattan, MD1 

Summary. Snoring occurs commonly in children and is sometimes associated with obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Based on clinical history alone, it is difficult to distinguish 
primary snoring, characterized by noisy breathing during sleep without apnea or hypoventilation, 
from snoring indicative of OSAS. An overnight polysomnogram (PSG) is required to establish a 
definitive diagnosis of OSAS. Because sleep evaluations are costly and resources are limited, 
we evaluated whether a home audiotape recording could accurately identify children with OSAS. 
We studied 36 children referred by pediatricians and otolaryngologists for possible OSAS. 
Parents completed a questionnaire about their child’s sleep and breathing and made a 15-min 
audiotape of the child’s breath sounds during sleep. Overnight PSGs were performed on all 
patients. 

There were 29 patients who completed the study: 15 patients in the Primary Snoring group 
(apnea/hypopnea index <5) and 14 patients in the OSAS group (apnea/hypopnea index ù5). No 
significant statistical differences existed between the two groups for physical characteristics or 
questionnaire responses. Seven observers analyzed the audiotapes for the presence of a 
struggle sound and respiratory pauses. The median sensitivity of the audiotape as a predictor of 
OSAS was 71% (range 43–86%), and the median specificity was 80% (range 67–80%). The 
presence of a struggle sound on the audiotape was the parameter most predictive of OSAS. 
There was a good level of agreement among the seven audiotape observers, as demonstrated 
by a mean and range kappa statistic of 0.70 (0.50–0.93) for the 21 pairs of observers. Using a 
clinical score to predict OSAS, the sensitivity was 46%, and the specificity was 83%. 

We conclude that findings on a home audiotape can be suggestive of OSAS, but are not 

sufficiently specific to reliably distinguish primary snoring from OSAS. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1999; 

27:267–272. © 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 

Key words: obstructive sleep apnea; primary snoring; polysomnogram; questionnaires. 

INTRODUCTION 

Snoring is a common and generally benign condition 
in children, but at times may be indicative of upper airway 
obstruction.1–4 Loud snoring in sleep is a common 
feature in both primary snoring, characterized by snoring 
without apnea, hypoventilation or sleep fragmentation, 
and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Unlike 
primary snoring, OSAS can result in significant morbidity, 
including daytime neurobehavioral abnormalities, 
cor pulmonale, systemic hypertension, failure to thrive, 
and sudden death.5 It is important, therefore, to distinguish 
primary snoring from OSAS so that appropriate 
treatment can be initiated. 

Clinical history alone has proven to be a limited tool 
for diagnosing OSAS. Brouilette et al.6 used a clinical 
score to separate patients into groups that were at high, 
indeterminate, or low risk for OSAS and performed overnight 
polysomnograms (PSGs) on these groups. They 

found a good correlation between the clinical score and 
the PSG only in those patients with high and low clinical 
scores, suggesting that patients with an indeterminate 
clinical score require further evaluation to diagnose 
OSAS. By contrast, Carroll et al.7 found a poor correlation 
between clinical history and PSG, concluding that 
patients with OSAS could not be identified by clinical 
history alone. Suen et al.8 showed that 50% of patients 
with a clinical history highly suggestive of OSAS, in


1Pediatric Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, New York. 

2Department of Biomathematical Sciences, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, New York. 

*Correspondence to: Carin Lamm, M.D., Pediatric Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Division, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave 

L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029. 
Received 16 March 1998; Accepted 12 November 1998. 

© 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 


268 Lamm et al. 

cluding snoring, observed apnea, daytime somnolence, 
and large tonsils, had no evidence of OSAS on PSG. 
Because the clinical history can be misleading, many 
pulmonologists and sleep specialists feel that an overnight 
PSG is necessary to diagnose OSAS. However, 
PSGs are expensive and labor-intensive, and require use 
of limited resources. 

Several abbreviated tests to assess for OSAS have 
been proposed. Potsic9 studied sleep sonography using a 
stethoscope attached to a microphone and a recorder that 
detected respiratory irregularities and apneas. He found a 
good correlation between respiratory pattern irregularities 
and apneas detected by sonography as compared to a 
limited 2-h PSG. Sivan et al.10 showed that home video-
recordings of sleeping patients evaluated for several parameters, 
including breath sound characteristics, were 
predictive for OSAS as diagnosed by PSGs limited to the 
respiratory channels in 84% of patients. 

We evaluated 36 patients to determine whether an inexpensive, 
and readily available technique, namely, a 
home audiotape of a child’s breath sounds during sleep, 
was useful in distinguishing patients with primary snoring 
from those with OSAS. 

METHODS 

Population 

Thirty-six children with no prior chronic medical disorders, 
upper airway surgery, craniofacial abnormalities, 
or neuromuscular disorders consecutively referred for 
loud snoring and possible OSAS by pediatricians and 
otolaryngologists to our Sleep Disorders Center over a 
1-year period, were entered in the study. The study was 
approved by our institutional review board; parental written 
consent was obtained. The children were 1.5–18 
years old (mean age . 
5.7 years). Seven children were 
unable to complete the study, six parents failed to bring 
in a satisfactory audiotape, and one patient was uncooperative 
during the overnight polysomnogram. 

Clinical Evaluation 

Upon entry to the study, all parents were asked to 
complete a questionnaire about their child’s sleep and 

Abbreviations 

AHI Apnea hypopnea index 
BMI Body mass index 
EEG Electroencephalogram 
OSAS Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome 
PETCO2 End-tidal carbon dioxide tension 
PSG Polysomnogram 
REM Rapid eye movement 
SaO2 Arterial oxygen saturation 

breathing. The questionnaire consisted of 19 questions 
regarding the child’s sleep-disordered breathing patterns 
and cognitive behavior. The possible responses were 
given arbitrary scores as follows: 1, never; 2, rarely; 3, 
sometimes; 4, most nights; and 5, every night. Positive 
responses were those scored 4 or 5. Each child was examined, 
noting weight, height, and tonsillar size, grades 
1–4.11 

The parents were instructed to make a 15-min home 
audiotape that demonstrated the characteristics of their 
child’s breathing patterns during sleep that concerned 
them. They were to include a typical period when the 
child was snoring loudly and struggling to breathe. The 
tape recorder was to be placed as close to the child’s head 
as possible. 

Polysomnographic Monitoring 

All children were evaluated with an overnight PSG in 
the sleep laboratory to detect obstructive apnea/ 
hypopnea. A parent slept in the same room, and a sleep 
technician was in attendance. The PSGs were performed 
within 3 weeks following the home audiotape recording. 
No sedation or sleep deprivation was used on any patient. 
Continuous monitoring of several physiologic parameters 
were recorded on a Grass recorder (Model 78E, 
Grass Instruments, Quincy, MA). Sleep stages were assessed 
by the EEG leads (C3,O2A2/C4,A1), bilateral 
electrooculographic leads, and submental electromyographic 
leads. Chest and abdominal bands detected respiratory 
effort. Oronasal airflow was semiquantitatively 
measured using oronasal thermistors. The electrocardiogram 
was recorded. Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) 
was assessed using a Nellcor N-1000 pulse oximeter 
(Nellcor, Hayward, CA). End-tidal carbon dioxide tension 
(PETCO2) was measured continuously by nasal cannula, 
using a Nellcor N-1000 monitor. The patient was 
videotaped during the entire evaluation. 

Polysomnographic Scoring 

Sleep was staged using the manual of Rechtschaffen 
and Kales.12 Obstructive apnea was defined as the cessation 
of oronasal airflow despite respiratory effort for a 
minimum duration of two respiratory cycles associated 
with a ù4% decrease in arterial saturation or an arousal. 
Obstructive hypopnea was defined as at least 50% reduction 
in oronasal airflow despite respiratory effort for a 
minimum duration of two respiratory cycles associated 
with a ù4% decrease in SaO2 or an arousal.13,14 Arousals 
were scored according to the guidelines of the American 
Sleep Disorders Association atlas.15 The obstructive apnea 
index was calculated to be the number of obstructive 
apneas per hour. The obstructive apnea/hypopnea index 


was calculated to be the number of obstructive apneas + 
hypopneas per hour (AHI). 

Analysis of Data 

The polysomnographic records were analyzed with the 
reader unaware of the clinical history. Polysomnograms 
were classified as Primary Snoring (AHI <5), and OSAS 
(AHI ù5) according to the method used by Guilleminault 
et al.16 These scoring criteria were established prior 
to the onset of data collection. The audiotapes were analyzed 
independently by seven observers unaware of the 
clinical history and the polysomnographic results (3 pulmonologists, 
2 pediatricians, and 2 nurses). All observers 
were trained by one of the authors using standardized 
written and verbal instructions. The observers listened to 
the audiotape for 15 min for the presence of struggle 
sounds and respiratory pauses. The struggle sound was 
demonstrated as a snort or a vocalization with minimal 
air entry; a minimum of three struggle sounds was required. 
The respiratory pause was defined as the absence 
of breath sounds for a minimum of 5 s. 

Statistical Analysis 

Physical characteristics and questionnaire responses 
were compared between the two groups using the Chi 
square test or, if the sample size was too small, Fisher’s 
exact test for2×2 tables. Polysomnographic differences 
between the two groups were analyzed using the Wilcoxon 
rank sum test. P < 0.05 was considered significant. 
The sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative 
predictive values of the home audiotape as a predictor of 
OSAS were determined for each evaluator, and the median 
and range were computed. Level of agreement 
among the observers was calculated using kappa analysis 
on each pair of observers. A clinical score as described 
by Brouilette et al.6 was used for the patients studied, and 
the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of the 
score were calculated. The clinical score was calculated 
as 1.42D + 1.41A + 0.71S - 3.83, where D is difficulty 
breathing, A is apnea, and S is snoring during sleep. 
Scores >3.5 were highly predictive of OSAS, and <-1 
indicated the absence of OSAS, scores between -1 and 

3.5 were indeterminate. 
RESULTS 

Twenty-nine children (age range, 1.5–18 years) completed 
the study. There were 15 patients in the Primary 
Snoring group and 14 patients in the OSAS group. There 
were 60% males in the Primary Snoring group and 86% 
males in the OSAS group. Results of the questionnaires 
as well as the physical characteristics of the patients are 
presented in Table 1. There were no significant statistical 

Audiotape as a Test for OSAS 269 

TABLE 1—Physical Characteristics and Positive 
Questionnaire Responses for Patients With Primary 
Snoring and OSAS1 

Primary snoring OSAS 
Nocturnal symptoms (AHI <5) (AHI ù5) 
n 15 14 
Age (years)2 6.0 ± 4.1 5.5 ± 4.5 
Enlarged tonsils (grades 3, 4)3 42.9% 46.2% 
BMI ø15th percentile 21.4% 16.7% 
BMI ù85th percentile 28.6% 58.3% 
Observed apnea 41.7% 66.7% 
Loud snoring 85.7% 100% 
Struggles to breathe 78.6% 71.4% 
Restless sleep 35.7% 46.2% 
Diaphoresis 30.8% 25.0% 
Snorts, respiratory pauses 69.2% 90.9% 
Daytime mouth breather 38.5% 60.0% 

1AHI, apnea hypopnea index; BMI, body mass index (kg/m2). Questions 
were scored as 1, never; 2, rarely; 3, sometimes; 4, most nights; 
and 5, every night. Positive responses were those scored 4 or 5. There 
were no statistically significant differences between the two groups 
using the chi square test, or when sample size was too small, Fisher’s 
exact test for2×2 tables. 
2Values are means ± standard deviation. 
3Tonsil size was graded 0–4: 0, not visible; 4, touching in the middle.11 

differences for the parameters studied between the two 
groups for any of the questionnaire responses or physical 
characteristics. 

Table 2 shows the polysomnographic results for the 
patients with Primary Snoring (AHI <5) and OSAS (AHI 

ù5). There were statistically significant differences between 
the two groups for mean SaO2 during respiratory 
events and lowest SaO2. 
Table 3 shows the median sensitivity, specificity, and 
ranges for the audiotape analyses of the seven observers 
using the presence of a struggle sound, respiratory 
pauses, and both parameters combined. A struggle sound 
was the parameter most predictive of OSAS, whereas 
when respiratory pauses alone or both parameters combined 
were used, the sensitivity decreased without improving 
specificity. 

The sensitivity for the audiotape analyzed for the presence 
of a struggle sound was the highest for the observer 
most experienced in sleep disorders: 86% as compared to 
the median of 71%, but there was no difference based on 
level of experience for specificity. The sensitivity and 
specificity for the audiotape analyzed for the presence of 
pauses or both parameters combined was not affected by 
the level of experience of the observers. 

Clinical scoring as described by Brouilette et al.6 was 
applied to the study patients. The clinical score had a low 
sensitivity of 46%, but a good specificity of 83%. Patients 
with indeterminate values for the clinical score 
were treated as not having OSAS, which reduced sensitivity 
but increased specificity. Sensitivity increased to 
91%, but specificity dropped to 8% when patients with 


270 Lamm et al. 

TABLE 2—Polysomnographic Results1 

Primary 
snoring OSAS 
(AHI <5) (AHI ù5) P* 
Total sleep time (h) 5.0 ± 1.2 5.7 ± 1.5 NS 
Obstructive AHI 1.7 ± 1.5 19.6 ± 13.1 0.0001** 
SaO2 percentage (awake) 98.1 ± 1.2 96.9 ± 2.0 NS 
Mean SaO2 percentage2 95.1 ± 2.3 89.3 ± 5.3 0.002** 
Lowest SaO2 percentage 93.5 ± 2.8 82.1 ± 8.9 0.0002** 
PETCO2 (mm Hg) (awake) 40.2 ± 3.2 42.3 ± 5.7 NS 
Mean PETCO2 (mm Hg) 
(asleep) 41.5 ± 3.6 44.4 ± 5.0 NS 
Peak PETCO2 (mm Hg) 49.1 ± 4.5 51.8 ± 6.9 NS 

1Values are means ± SD. AHI, apnea hypopnea index; SaO2, arterial 
oxygen saturation; PETCO2, end-tidal carbon dioxide tension; NS, not 
significant. 
2Mean SaO2 percentage during respiratory events. 
*P value by Wilcoxon rank sum test. 
**P < 0.05 was considered significant. 


TABLE 3—Sensitivity and Specificity of a Home Audiotape 
as a Predictor for OSAS 

Sensitivity1 Specificity1 
Audiotape (struggle sound) 71% (43–86%) 80% (67–80%) 
Audiotape (respiratory pauses) 43% (29–57%) 80% (73–87%) 
Audiotape (struggle sound + 
pauses) 43% (29–50%) 80% (73–87%) 

1Median and range for the seven observers. 

indeterminate values were treated as having OSAS. It is 
important to note that only 23 patients or parents fully 
completed the questionnaire and therefore had clinical 
scores calculated. Fourteen (61%) of the patients had 
indeterminate values. 

Table 4 shows positive and negative predictive values 
for the audiotape as a test for OSAS. In this population of 
patients referred for possible OSAS, the prevalence rate 
of OSAS was 48%. If a patient had an audiotape demonstrating 
struggle sounds, the likelihood of OSAS increased 
to 75%, as indicated by the median positive predictive 
value. 

The mean and range of kappa statistics for all pairs of 
observers using audiotape analysis for the presence of a 
struggle sound was 0.70 (0.50–0.93), indicating a good 
level of agreement among the seven observers. 

DISCUSSION 

This study shows that a home audiotape has limitations 
as an abbreviated test for OSAS in children with 
loud snoring during sleep. The presence of a struggle 
sound on an audiotape in this population referred for 
possible OSAS increased the likelihood of OSAS in this 
group from 48% to 75%. Patients with OSAS, as compared 
with those with primary snoring, tended to have a 
struggle sound or respiratory pauses more often on their 

TABLE 4—Predictive Values for a Home Audiotape as a 
Test for OSAS 

Audiotape1 
Positive predictive 
value 
Negative predictive 
value 
Struggle 
Pause 
Struggle/pause 
75% (60–80%) 
67% (57–75%) 
67% (57–75%) 
73% (58–86%) 
62% (56–80%) 
60% (57–87%) 

1Median (range) for the seven observers. 

audiotapes, but these findings were not sufficiently specific 
to distinguish patients with primary snoring from 
those with OSAS. This method for evaluating the audiotapes 
was transferable to other health care providers, who 
demonstrated a good level of agreement. 

All subjects in this study were referred for loud snoring. 
Snoring occurs commonly in children and fluctuates 
in frequency and intensity with upper respiratory infections.
2–4 Owen et al.3 described two peaks in snoring 
prevalence, the first at age 4 years and a second at age 
8–9 years. He postulated the 4-year-old peak was secondary 
to adenotonsillar hypertrophy and that the 8–9year-
old peak a result of atopy or allergic rhinitis. Ali et 
al.2,4 found a 12.1% snoring prevalence in a cohort of 
4–5-year-olds. This group was studied 2 years later, and 
more than half of the children who snored originally had 
ceased doing so.2,4 

OSAS or lesser degrees of sleep-disordered breathing 
were detected in 1–2% of children, all of whom had 
presented with loud snoring.2,6 Because snoring is so 
common and generally of little clinical significance, children 
with OSAS are commonly underrecognized, resulting 
in significant delay in diagnosis and needless morbidity.
1,17 

Using questionnaire responses and physical findings, 
we were unable to distinguish primary snoring from 
OSAS. We also used the clinical scoring of Brouilette et 
al.6 and found that it had a low sensitivity. Brouilette et 
al.6 found this clinical score useful in predicting OSAS 
only when they used a control group consisting of patients 
taken from a general pediatric population. However, 
in a subset of patients referred for possible OSAS 
similar to those in this study, they found that the clinical 
score misclassified 12.5% of patients subsequently diagnosed 
by PSG with OSAS as normal, and 57.1% of patients 
with normal PSGs were misclassified as OSAS 
cases. Our findings are also in agreement with those of 
Carroll et al.,7 who used a questionnaire for patients referred 
to a sleep disorders clinic and showed that history 
could not separate patients with primary snoring from 
those with OSAS. 

Because the history can be inconclusive, the gold standard 
for the diagnosis of OSAS remains the overnight 
PSG. Resources for sleep evaluations are limited, and an 
inexpensive abbreviated test would be useful. Observation 
of the sleeping child by medical personnel for ap



neas, chest wall retractions, paradoxical chest and abdominal 
movements, and oxygen desaturation has been 
used to diagnose OSAS.17 This method is useful for the 
more severe cases that readily exhibit oxygen desaturation. 
Often patients exhibit sleep-disordered breathing 
only after several hours of sleep. In a study comparing 
nap to overnight PSGs, Marcus et al.18 showed that nap 
PSGs had a positive predictive value for OSAS of 100% 
and a negative predictive value of 17%. They concluded 
that nap PSGs are helpful when respiratory parameters 
are abnormal, but when the findings are negative, an 
overnight PSG is necessary. In that study, sedation with 
chloral hydrate, which can depress upper airway muscle 
tone, was required for naps in 77.5% of patients. 

Home pulse oximetry has been used to evaluate patients 
suspected of having OSAS.19 Frequently, there is 
much artifact with this technique secondary to motion or 
loose leads, causing difficulties in data interpretation. By 
contrast, in the sleep laboratory a trained technician observes 
the patient throughout the study, noting movement 
and reapplying leads as needed. A simultaneous pulse 
wave tracing assesses the accuracy of the oxygen saturation 
measurement in the sleep laboratory. Oximetry 
alone will not detect some patients with significant airway 
obstruction because sometimes the obstruction is not 
associated with hypoxia but rather with sleep fragmentation. 


Potsic9 studied sleep sonography as a diagnostic 
method for OSAS, using a computer-assisted program. 
Sonography equipment is not readily available to most 
general physicians, and the technique was only compared 
to a 2-h PSG limited to the respiratory channels. Video 
recordings of sleeping children have been compared to 
PSGs without sleep staging and were found to be predictive 
for OSAS with a sensitivity of 94% and specificity 
of 68%.10 A high or low videotape score correlated 
with PSG findings, but an intermediate score was inconclusive. 
One study was able to detect similar numbers of 
apneas, hypopneas, and levels of oxygen desaturation on 
an unattended home test using five respiratory channels 
and video-recording, as compared to overnight PSGs performed 
in the sleep laboratory, indicating that such a 
simplified unattended home test may be useful in selected 
patients.20 

Abbreviated tests that employ or are compared to 
PSGs without sleep staging are limited in that the study 
period may lack an assessment of REM (rapid eye movement) 
sleep, a phase when sleep-disordered breathing is 
prevalent. Daytime naps often have inadequate or no 
REM periods. These abbreviated PSGs prevent detection 
of respiratory events associated with only EEG arousals 
rather than hypoxemia. Respiratory obstruction associated 
with hypoventilation will also be missed without an 
assessment of either PETC02 or esophageal pressure. 
Overnight PSGs with sleep staging have an added benefit 

Audiotape as a Test for OSAS 271 

in that they allow assessment of severity of OSAS, which 
is predictive of respiratory compromise following surgery.
21 

We chose to evaluate patients using an audiotape, 
which is inexpensive and widely available, and compared 
it to an overnight PSG with sleep staging. The taping was 
limited to 15 min for the convenience of the parent and 
physician. Some patients did not have struggle sounds or 
respiratory pauses on their audiotapes, despite having 
polysomnographic evidence of OSAS. These subjects 
may have had only partial airway obstruction and hypoventilation 
that would be accompanied by loud continuous 
snoring without respiratory pauses, a common 
finding in children with OSAS.16 Other abbreviated tests 
such as sonography and videotaping have this limitation. 
It is possible that the parents may have missed the time 
period when there were significant respiratory abnormalities 
because the tape was made only for a short portion 
of the total sleep time. Most apnea/hypopnea occurs 
during REM sleep, a stage of sleep most prevalent in the 
early morning, when the parents are likely to be asleep. 
Sleep staging was included in the overnight PSGs so that 
sufficient REM sleep could be assured. 

Goldstein et al.22 clinically evaluated 30 children by 
history, physical examination, and audiotape, classifying 
them as definite, possible, or unlikely to have OSAS. 
They validated the clinical diagnosis with overnight 
PSGs, using adult criteria for numbers of apneas and 
hypopneas, and found a 92.3% sensitivity and 29.4% 
specificity for the clinical evaluation. In our study, the 
PSGs were scored using the criteria recommended for 
pediatric patients.16 Additionally, Goldstein et al.22 analyzed 
the tapes only for the presence of respiratory 
pauses, whereas we chose struggle sounds, respiratory 
pauses, and the combination of the two because children 
often have periods of partial airway obstruction without 
discrete apneas. As seen in Table 3, the presence of a 
struggle sound was a more sensitive parameter for predicting 
OSAS than respiratory pauses. 

Some patients had struggle sounds and pauses on their 
audiotapes but normal PSGs. An important limitation to 
our study is that taping and the PSG were performed on 
different nights. There may have been different levels of 
airway obstruction depending on body position, concomitant 
upper respiratory infection, or allergic rhinitis 
between the nights the audiotape and the PSG were recorded. 
Even though taping was not done the same night 
as the PSG, it is unlikely that the sensitivity and specificity 
could have been significantly different from the 
night of the study because these patients all had chronic 
symptoms ranging from 6 months to several years. In 
addition, by history there was no evidence of acute respiratory 
infections on the night the tape or PSG was 
performed. The sensitivity and specificity might have 
improved if tape recordings had been made for longer 


272 Lamm et al. 

time periods to capture different sleep stages, or on several 
different nights and in different body positions. 

It is also possible that defining airway obstruction by 
changes detected on the nasal thermistor and oximeter 
recordings may have been too insensitive for detecting 
patients with significant obstruction, and that these patients 
could be more accurately identified using esophageal 
pressure measurements.23 Patients with upper airway 
resistance syndrome have increased respiratory effort, 
without clearly defined apneas, hypopneas, or 
oxygen desaturation. The increased respiratory effort is 
only detected by large negative esophageal pressure 
swings and can sometimes be associated with sleep fragmentation. 


In this study, we investigated whether a method of 
analyzing tapes was transferable to other health care providers, 
including 3 pulmonologists, 2 nurses, and 2 general 
pediatricians. We found a good level of agreement 
among the observers. The observer most experienced in 
sleep disorders had the best sensitivity when analyzing 
the tapes for the presence of a struggle sound, suggesting 
that additional training of the evaluators might increase 
accuracy. 

We conclude that in children with loud snoring during 
sleep, findings on a home audiotape, as analyzed by a 
standardized scoring system, were suggestive of OSAS. 
However, the findings were not specific enough to reliably 
distinguish patients with primary snoring from those 
with OSAS. Other objective measurements such as a 
PSG are still necessary to document the presence and 
severity of OSAS in these patients. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors thank Adrienne Goldberg, M.D., Linda 
Peters, R.N., M.S., C.P.N.P., Eduardo Sembrano, M.D., 
Andrew Ting, M.D., Gloria Xanthos, R.N., and Michael 
Yaeker, M.D., for their assistance in evaluating the audiotapes. 


REFERENCES 

1. Warwick B, Robertson C, Phelan P. Snoring in children: is it 
pathological? Med J Aust 1985;143:335–336. 
2. Ali NJ, Pitson DJ, Stradling JR. Snoring, sleep disturbance and 
behavior in 4–5 year olds. Arch Dis Child 1993;68:360–366. 
3. Owen GO, Canter RJ, Robinson A. Snoring apnea and ENT symptoms 
in the paediatric community. Clin Otolaryngol 1996;21:130– 
134. 
4. Ali NJ, Pitson D, Stradling JR. Natural history of snoring and 
related behaviour problems between the ages of 4 and 7 years. 
Arch Dis Child 1994;71:74–76. 
5. Marcus CL, Carroll JL. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. In: 
Loughlin GM, Eigen H, editors. Respiratory disease in children: 
diagnosis and management. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 
1994. p 475–500. 

6. Brouilette R, Hanson D, David R, Klemka L, Szatkowski A, Fernbach 
S, Hunt C. A diagnostic approach to suspected obstructive 
sleep apnea in children. J Pediatr 1984;105:10–14. 
7. Carroll JL, McColley SA, Marcus CL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM. 
Inability of clinical history to distinguish primary snoring from 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in children. Chest 1995;108: 
610–618. 
8. Suen JS, Arnold JE, Brooks LJ. Adenotonsillectomy for treatment 
of obstructive sleep apnea in children. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1995;121:525–530. 
9. Potsic WP. Comparison of polysomnography and sonography for 
assessing regularity of respiration during sleep in adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy. Laryngoscope 1987;97:1430–1437. 
10. Sivan Y, Kornecki A, Schonfeld T. Screening obstructive sleep 
apnea syndrome by home videotape recording in children. Eur 
Respir J 1996;9:2127–2131. 
11. Cable HR, Batch AG, Stevens DJ. The relevance of physical signs 
in recurrent tonsillitis in children. J Laryngol Otol 1986;100: 
1047–1051. 
12. Rechtschaffen A, Kales A. A manual of standardized terminology, 
techniques and scoring systems for sleep stages of human subjects. 
Los Angeles: Brain Information Service/Brain Research Institute, 
UCLA; 1968. 
13. Carroll JL, Loughlin GM. Diagnostic criteria for obstructive sleep 
apnea in children. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;14:71–74. 
14. Marcus CL, Omlin KJ, Basinski DJ, Bailey SL, Rachal AB, Von 
Pechman WS, Keens TG, Ward SL. Normal polysomnographic 
values for children and adolescents. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 
146:1235–1239. 
15. Atlas Task Force of the American Sleep Disorders Association. 
EEG arousals: scoring rules and examples. Sleep 1992;15:174– 
183. 
16. Guilleminault C, Pelayo R, Leger D, Clark A, Bocian RCZ. Recognition 
of sleep-disordered breathing in children. Pediatrics 
1996;98:871–882. 
17. Brouilette RT, Fernbach SK, Hunt CE. Obstructive sleep apnea in 
infants and children. J Pediatr 1982;100:31–40. 
18. Marcus CL, Keens TG, Ward SLD. Comparison of nap and overnight 
polysomnography in children. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;13: 
16–21. 
19. Stradling JR, Thomas G, Warley ARH, Williams P, Freeland A. 
Effect of adenotonsillectomy on nocturnal hypoxemia, sleep, and 
symptoms in snoring children. Lancet 1990;335:249–253. 
20. Jacob SV, Morrelli A, Mograss MA, Ducharme FM, Schloss MD, 
Brouilette RT. Home testing for pediatric obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome secondary to adenotonsillar hypertrophy. Pediatr Pulmonol 
1995;20:241–252. 
21. McColley SA, April MM, Carroll JL, Naclerio RM, Loughlin 
GM. Respiratory compromise after adenotonsillectomy in children 
with obstructive sleep apnea. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck 
Surg 1992;118:940–943. 
22. Goldstein NA, Sculerati N, Walsleben JA, Bhatia N, Friedman 
DM, Rapoport DM. Clinical diagnosis of pediatric obstructive 
sleep apnea validated by polysomnography. Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1994;111:611–617. 
23. Guilleminault C, Winkle R, Korokin R, Simmons B. Children and 
nocturnal snoring: Evaluation of the effects of sleep related respiratory 
resistive load and daytime functioning. Eur J Pediatr 1982; 
139:165–171. 

