The Laryngoscope 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc. 
© 2006 The American Laryngological, 
Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc. 
Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children: 
Survey of Current Practice 
Ron B. Mitchell, MD; Kevin D. Pereira, MD; Norman R. Friedman, MD 
Objectives: The American Academy of Pediatrics 
recommends objective testing with polysomnography 
(PSG) before adenotonsillectomy for sleep-disordered 
breathing (SDB) in children. Several studies have also 
shown that a clinical diagnosis correlates poorly with 
the presence or severity of SDB as confirmed by PSG. 
The purpose of this study was to examine surgical 
practice patterns among members of the American 
Society of Pediatric Otolaryngologists (ASPO). Methods: 
A questionnaire was sent electronically to all 
members of ASPO asking about demographics, PSG 
facilities, and pre- and postoperative management of 
children with SDB. Results: A total of 245 questionnaires 
were sent, and 105 (43%) were completed. 
The results of the survey show that up to 50% of 
pediatric visits in individual practices were for 
SDB. Only 10% of children who underwent adenotonsillectomy 
had PSG, and the most common reason 
to request it was doubt about diagnosis. The 
average wait for PSG was 3 to 6 weeks. Preoperative 
PSG was routinely requested in children under 
1 year of age and children with morbid obesity, 
craniofacial abnormalities, or neuromuscular disease. 
The majority of pediatric otolaryngologists 
proceeded with an adenotonsillectomy in symptomatic 
children with normal PSG findings. Postoperative 
PSG was requested in less than 5% of children. 
Approximately 20% of children who underwent adenotonsillectomy 
for suspected SDB were observed 
overnight in hospital. Conclusions: A majority of 
respondents from this survey rely on a clinical 
diagnosis rather than PSG to recommend an adenotonsillectomy 
for SDB in children. PSG was 
generally used when the diagnosis was in doubt. 
Key Words: Pediatric sleep apnea, pediatric sleepdisordered 
breathing, snoring, tonsillectomy. 
Laryngoscope, 116:956–958, 2006 
INTRODUCTION 
Adenotonsillar hypertrophy is the main cause of 
sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) in children, and there is 
increasing evidence that adenotonsillectomy is effective at 
improving sleep,1 daytime behavior, and quality-of-life.2 
Over the last 20 years, there has been recognition of an 
association between SDB and daytime behavioral problems 
in children.3,4 
Adenotonsillectomy has traditionally been performed 
for recurrent streptococcal tonsillitis and its sequelae. 
However, in recent times, the prevalence of SDB has made 
it the primary indication for surgical excision of the tonsils 
and adenoids in children.5 Several studies have also 
shown that a clinical diagnosis correlates poorly with the 
presence or severity of SDB as confirmed by polysomnography 
(PSG).6 The present study examined the management 
of children with SDB by members of the American 
Society of Pediatric Otolaryngologists (ASPO). 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
In March 2004, 245 questionnaires were sent electronically 
to members of ASPO. A second survey was sent 30 days later to 
nonresponders. The survey was anonymous but coded to identify 
nonresponders and ensure elimination of multiple responses. 
An 18–question survey was designed that asked about the 
preoperative and postoperative management of children with 
SDB. The investigators designed the survey after a thorough 
review of the literature. The survey was pilot tested by five 
pediatric otolaryngologists and ambiguities corrected. It was then 
peer–reviewed by two ASPO members anonymously, and their 
comments were included in the survey. The survey had four 
domains: demographic information, sleep-laboratory facilities, 
preoperative management, and postoperative management. Each 
question had specific choices from a drop-down menu, and none of 
the questions had an open-ended component. The survey was 
limited to two pages to optimize the response rate. 
The data were reported as a percentage of total response to 
each question. Variables were cross-tabulated, and a Pearson 
chi-square was used for statistical analysis (SPSS version 12, 
Chicago, IL). The level of significance was set at P  .05. 
From the Departments of Otolaryngology and Pediatrics (R.B.M.), VA 
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia, U.S.A., the Department of 
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery (K.D.P.), The University of Texas 
Medical School at Houston, Houston, Texas, U.S.A., and the Department of 
Otolaryngology (N.R.F.), University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver, Colorado, U.S.A. 
Editor’s Note: This Manuscript was accepted for publication February 
13, 2006. 
This study was presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Society for Pediatric Otolaryngology, Las Vegas, Nevada, U.S.A., May 28, 
2005. 
Send Correspondence to Dr. Ron B. Mitchell, VA Commonwealth 
University, Department of Otolaryngology, PO Box 980146, Richmond, VA 
23298. E-mail: rbmitchell@vcu.edu 
DOI: 10.1097/01.MLG.0000216413.22408.FD 
Laryngoscope 116: June 2006 Mitchell et al.: Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children 
956

RESULTS 
Of the 245 questionnaires, 97 were returned within 
30 days, and 12 more were returned after a second mailing. 
Two were incomplete and were excluded. Therefore, 
107 (44%) were considered for analysis. Twenty-six percent 
of respondents reported being in practice for more 
than 20 years, 45% between 10 and 20 years, 27% between 
5 and 10 years, and 2% less than 5 years. Seventy-two 
percent completed a pediatric otolaryngology fellowship, 
and 84% practiced in a children’s hospital. The majority of 
pediatric otolaryngologists (89%) reported that 10% to 
50% of their practice involved the management of children 
with a sleep disturbance. 
Sleep Laboratory Facilities 
Eighty-three percent of respondents had access to a 
sleep laboratory, and for 67% of respondents, this was a 
dedicated pediatric facility. For 43% of respondents, a 
pediatric sleep study involved a wait of more than 6 
weeks. 
Preoperative Evaluation 
In the majority of children with a sleep disturbance, 
the diagnosis of SDB was based on clinical criteria. 
Seventy-five percent of respondents requested PSG in less 
than 10% of children who presented with a sleep disturbance. 
Doubt about the diagnosis of SDB was the most 
common reason (60%) to request PSG. Other reasons included 
identifying children who require postoperative 
monitoring (31%) and parental request for PSG (4%). For 
the following groups of children, respondents routinely 
requested preoperative PSG: children under 1 year (50%), 
children 1 to 3 years old (28%), children with morbid 
obesity (54%), children with Down syndrome (38%), children 
with craniofacial abnormalities (58%), children with 
neuromuscular disease (62%), and premature children 
(11%). 
Sixty-five percent of respondents relied entirely on 
the written interpretation of the PSG report. The most 
important factors in the report were the minimum O2 
saturation (77%) and the respiratory disturbance index 
(64%). The majority (64%) of responding pediatric otolaryngologists 
would proceed with an adenotonsillectomy 
when the clinical picture strongly suggested SDB irrespective 
of whether the diagnosis was confirmed by PSG. 
Postoperative Evaluation 
Eighty-seven percent of responding pediatric otolaryngologists 
requested postoperative PSG in 10% or less of 
children after adenotonsillectomy for SDB. The groups of 
children in whom respondents routinely requested postoperative 
PSG included children under 1 (13%), children 1 
to 3 years old (6%), children with morbid obesity (31%), 
children with Down syndrome (18%), children with craniofacial 
abnormalities (24%), children with neuromuscular 
disease (29%), and premature children (4%). The majority 
of children were not observed overnight postoperatively, 
with the most important reasons for overnight observation 
being associated comorbidities, age of child, and severity 
of sleep study. 
Responding pediatric otolaryngologists requested the 
same percentage of preoperative and postoperative PSG 
regardless of the respondent’s years in practice, length of 
wait for PSG, or whether they practiced in a children’s 
hospital. A comparison of age, sex, and years in practice 
was not significant for first and second responders. A 
comparison of age and sex for responders and nonresponders 
showed no significant difference between the 
groups. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study shows that the overwhelming majority 
of pediatric otolaryngologists rely on a clinical diagnosis 
of SDB rather than PSG to schedule surgery. Parents 
often report snoring, restless sleep, and breathholding 
episodes in their children. Daytime symptoms 
include excessive somnolence, hyperactivity, and aggressive 
behavior. When these signs and symptoms are 
present, and examination confirms adenotonsillar hypertrophy, 
a majority of respondents would proceed with surgical 
therapy despite a normal PSG. 
Children with SDB make up a significant part of 
most pediatric otolaryngology practices. Rosenfeld and 
Green5 reviewed 1,722 tonsil and adenoid procedures over 
a 9 year period and showed that SDB, as an indication for 
surgery, increased from 0% to 19% over this period. They 
predicted that this trend was likely to continue. Indeed, 
this study confirms that for the majority of pediatric otolaryngologists, 
the assessment of children with a sleep 
disturbance makes up from 10% to 50% of their practice. 
There is ongoing debate as to the role of PSG in the 
preoperative management of children with SDB. The 
American Academy of Pediatrics7 in a clinical practice 
guideline on the diagnosis and management of childhood 
SDB recommends that children be routinely screened for 
snoring. In children who are symptomatic, PSG is recommended 
as the diagnostic test of choice. An official statement 
of the American Thoracic Society8 gives similar recommendations. 
In the latter document, there is an 
additional recommendation that in children with significant 
airway obstruction, PSG may be deferred to proceed 
with therapy expeditiously. The present study highlights 
some of the difficulties in following these recommendations. 
In this survey, 17% of respondents did not have 
access to a sleep laboratory, and 40% did not have access 
to a dedicated pediatric facility. In addition, over 50% 
waited for 6 weeks or longer to obtain PSG. Clearly, routine 
preoperative PSG in all children with suspected SDB 
is currently not feasible. 
Preoperative PSG is requested more frequently by 
pediatric otolaryngologists in certain “high-risk” groups of 
children, including those under 3 years, in children with 
obesity, children with Down syndrome, children with 
craniofacial abnormalities, and children with neuromuscular 
disease. There is evidence that children under 3 
years of age and those with comorbidities such as Down 
syndrome and neuromuscular disease9–11 are at a high 
risk of postoperative respiratory compromise requiring 
intervention. Preoperative PSG findings have been shown 
to accurately predict those children who would most benefit 
from a planned admission.9 In addition, preoperative 
PSG can be a useful baseline measure in children who are 
Laryngoscope 116: June 2006 Mitchell et al.: Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children 
957

less likely to see resolution of SDB after adenotonsillectomy 
and may require further intervention. Nevertheless, 
preoperative PSG is not routinely requested in high-risk 
children. The majority of pediatric otolaryngologists considered 
children under 3 and those with obesity, craniofacial 
abnormalities, and neuromuscular disease as most in 
need of preoperative PSG. 
Pediatric otolaryngologists rarely request postoperative 
PSG. The majority of respondents request postoperative 
PSG in less than 10% of children. The rate of postoperative 
PSG is higher in children under 3 years of age and 
in those with significant comorbidities. Interestingly, the 
most common reason for routine postoperative PSG was 
obesity. Both the American Academy of Pediatrics7,12 and 
the American Thoracic Society8 recommend that children 
be reevaluated after surgical therapy for SDB and that 
those who remain symptomatic and high-risk patients 
undergo objective testing with PSG. Indeed Suen et al.1 
studied 26 children with SDB with preoperative and postoperative 
PSG. Four (15%) children had persistent SDB 
postoperatively, and in all of these children, the parents 
reported persistent snoring. More research is clearly 
needed to examine whether the current practice of selective 
postoperative PSG by pediatric otolaryngologists is 
adequate for the children with persistent SDB after 
adenotonsillectomy. 
The majority of children with SDB are not observed 
overnight postoperatively. The most important reasons for 
overnight observation is the young age of the child, associated 
comorbidities, and severity of preoperative PSG. 
Krishna et al.13 surveyed 418 randomly selected otolaryngologists 
and reported a significant variation in admission 
criteria after adenotonsillectomy. Children under 3, those 
with severe SDB, or children with significant comorbidities 
were most likely to be observed overnight. Although 
criteria for overnight observation of children after adenotonsillectomy 
for SDB varies widely, it is clear that the 
majority of children are discharged on the day of surgery. 
It is likely that this trend will continue. 
The strength of this study is that it included the 
practice patterns of over 100 pediatric otolaryngologists 
from a broad geographic base and drawn from a national 
professional society. The anonymity of the survey ensured 
that participants could freely answer the questions without 
medicolegal concerns. Several limitations need to be 
recognized. First, the response rate of 44% was low but in 
keeping with previous surveys.13,14 There was no way of 
surveying nonresponders and comparing their answers 
with responders. The study was also directed at ASPO 
members, who may not represent the practice patterns of 
non-ASPO otolaryngologists. 
Despite these limitations, the present study does 
characterize the management of children with SDB by 
pediatric otolaryngologists. The majority of children with 
SDB undergo adenotonsillectomy without preoperative 
PSG, and they are rarely observed overnight after surgery 
or undergo postoperative PSG. The current practice of 
pediatric otolaryngologists differs from the recommendations 
of the American Academy of Pediatrics7,12 and the 
American Thoracic Society.8 To achieve compliance, objective 
criteria for the use of PSG to justify adenotonsillectomy 
in children with SDB are required. Research to develop 
these criteria would establish age- and sex-specific 
criteria based on statistical analysis of the following data: 
PSG findings; clinical findings; parental reports; patient 
demographics; and comorbidities. Child behavior and 
quality of life2–4 may also play a role in the evaluation of 
therapy for SDB. A long-term research project to develop 
objective criteria for adenotonsillectomy is currently in 
progress on the basis of a large sample of children with 
SDB. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The majority of children with SDB undergo adenotonsillectomy 
without preoperative PSG, and they are 
rarely observed overnight after surgery or undergo postoperative 
PSG. The current practice of pediatric otolaryngologists 
differs from the recommendations of the American 
Academy of Pediatrics and the American Thoracic 
Society. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. Suen JS, Arnold JE, Brooks LJ. Adenotonsillectomy for treatment 
of obstructive sleep apnea in children. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1995;121:525–530. 
2. Mitchell RB, Kelly J, Call E, et al. Quality of life after adenotonsillectomy 
for obstructive sleep apnea in children. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004;130:190–194. 
3. Goldstein NA, Post JC, Rosenfeld RM, et al. Impact of tonsillectomy 
and adenoidectomy on child behavior. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2000;126:494–498. 
4. Goldstein NA, Fatima M, Campbell TF, et al. Child behavior 
and quality of life before and after tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;128: 
770–775. 
5. Rosenfeld RM, Green RP. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy: 
changing trends. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1990;99: 
187–191. 
6. Brietzke SE, Katz ES, Roberson DW. Can history and physical 
examination reliably diagnose pediatric obstructive 
sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome? A systematic review of 
the literature. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004;131: 
827–832. 
7. Clinical practice guideline: diagnosis and management of 
childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics 
2002;109:704–712. 
8. American Thoracic Society. Standards and indications for 
cardiopulmonary sleep studies in children. Am J Respir 
Crit Care Med 1996;153:866–878. 
9. McColley SA, April MM, Carroll JL, et al. Respiratory compromise 
after adenotonsillectomy in children with obstructive 
sleep apnea. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 
118:940–943. 
10. Mitchell RB, Kelly J. Adenotonsillectomy for obstructive 
sleep apnea in obese children. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
2004;131:104–108. 
11. Biavati MJ, Manning SC, Phillips DL. Predictive factors for 
respiratory complications after tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy 
in children. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 
1997;123:517–521. 
12. Schechter MS. Technical report: diagnosis and management 
of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics 
2002;109:e69. 
13. Krishna P, LaPage MJ, Hughes LF, et al. Current practice 
patterns in tonsillectomy and perioperative care. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinolaryngol 2004;68:779–784. 
14. Weatherly RA, Mai EF, Ruzicka DL, et al. Identification and 
evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea prior to adenotonsillectomy 
in children: a survey of practice patterns. Sleep 
Med 2003;4:297–307. 
Laryngoscope 116: June 2006 Mitchell et al.: Sleep-Disordered Breathing in Children 
958

