Act. 
Pñdiat. 
89. 
708±12. 
200. 


Can parents predict the severity of childhood obstructive sleep apnoea? 


A Preutthipan1, T Chantarojanasiri1, S Suwanjutha1 and U Udomsubpayakul2 

Division of Paediatric Pulmonology, Department of Paediatrics1, and Statistical Unit, Research Centre2, Faculty of Medicine, 
Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand 

Preutthipan A, Chantarojanasiri T, Suwanjutha S, Udomsubpayakul U. Can parents predict the 
severity of childhood obstructive sleep apnoea? Acta Pædiatr 2000; 89: 708–12. Stockholm. ISSN 
0803–5253 

Objective: To determine whether parents’ observations can be used to predict the severity of the 
obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) in children. Study design: Sixty-five children with 
OSAS diagnosed by overnight polysomnography were consecutively recruited and classified as 
having severe or non-severe OSAS according to the obstructive apnoea index (OAI) and the 
oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (SpO2) nadir. Parents were asked to complete a 
questionnaire about the child’s breathing difficulties at night. Results: Twenty-eight patients were 
classified as severe OSAS and 37 as non-severe OSAS. There were no differences between the 
two groups with respect to age, sex or body mass index. Male to female ratio was 5:1. Parents of 
children with severe OSAS more frequently reported observed cyanosis (35 vs 8%; p = 0.02); 
obstructive apnoea (60 vs 35%; p = 0.04); snoring extremely loudly (52 vs 22%; p = 0.01); shaking 
the child (64 vs 35%; p = 0.02); watching the child during sleep and being afraid of apnoea (85 vs 
60%; p = 0.03). However, neither any single nor combinations of observations showed high values 
for both sensitivity and specificity. 

Conclusions: Although some parents’ observations are more frequently reported in children with 
severe OSAS, neither any single nor combinations of observations accurately predict the severity of 
OSAS. Polysomnography is still needed to determine the severity of obstruction. 

Key words: Children, diagnosis, obstructive sleep apnoea, severity 

A Preutthipan, Department of Paediatrics, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand (Tel. .66 2 201 18 15, fax. .66 2 201 18 50, e-mail. raapt@mahidol.ac.th) 

The obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) is 
increasingly being recognized in the paediatric population. 
It is characterized by prolonged partial upper 
airway obstruction and/or intermittent complete obstructions 
(obstructive apnoeas) during sleep that 
disrupt normal oxygenation, ventilation and sleep 
architecture (1, 2). If the diagnosis is delayed and the 
disease is left untreated, it can lead to failure to thrive, 
cor pulmonale, mental retardation and even death (2, 3). 

We previously reported that among 39 Thai children 
with breathing difficulties during sleep who were 
referred to the paediatric chest clinic at Ramathibodi 
Hospital, 85% were diagnosed with OSAS by polysomnography 
(PSG) and 36% were found to have 
severe OSAS (4). The prevalence and the severity of 
childhood OSAS is frighteningly high compared to a 
similarly designed Western study (5). This may be due 
to a relatively lower awareness of OSAS among 
primary physicians. Therefore, patients are more likely 
referred late in the course of the disease. 

The standard testing procedure for documenting and 
grading the severity of OSAS is the overnight PSG (6). 
However, such testing is expensive, time-consuming 

and not readily available throughout the country. A 
number of children have to wait for extended periods of 
time until they are seen by sleep specialists and PSG can 
be performed. These children, especially those with 
severe OSAS, should be diagnosed and treated 
promptly, as they are at greater risk for serious 
complications (7). Parents’ observation of the child’s 
sleep, if reliable, would be a valuable and simple 
screening tool for primary physicians to identify which 
children need early referral and investigation. Brouillette 
et al (8) investigated the clinical usefulness of 
historical data obtained from the parents to diagnose 
OSAS. They found that a clinical scoring system based 
on three questions about breathing during sleep could be 
used to distinguish children with OSAS requiring 
adenotonsillectomy from those without OSAS. By 
contrast, Caroll et al. (9) reported that, in a paediatric 
sleep apnoea clinic setting where most children were 
referred because of possible OSAS, it was not possible 
to classify children with primary snoring from those 
with OSAS from the answers to questions obtained from 
the parents about breathing during sleep. The present 
study aimed to determine whether parents’ observations 

Ó 2000 Taylor & Francis. ISSN 0803-5253 


ACTA PÆDIATR 89 (2000) 

of their child’s sleep were useful in predicting the 
severity of OSAS in children. 

Patients and methods 

Consecutive children, aged less than 15 y, referred to 
the paediatric chest clinic at Ramathibodi Hospital for 
evaluation of OSAS, were recruited from November 
1995 through October 1998. The study was approved by 
our institutional review board: parental written consent 
was obtained. At the first visit to our clinic, parents were 
verbally instructed to observe their child’s sleep and 
breathing pattern overnight at home for at least 2 wk. 
An overnight PSG was then performed on each child in 
a quiet, comfortable, darkened room, with one parent 
sleeping in the same room with the child. No sedation or 
sleep deprivation was used on any child. 

Questionnaire 

We modified a portion of the expanded obstructive 
sleep apnoea questionnaires developed by Caroll et al. 

(9) to obtain information on the parents’ observations of 
the child’s sleep. The parents completed the questionnaire 
at night prior to performing the PSG. The 
questionnaire consisted of 10 questions regarding the 
child’s breathing patterns and parental reactions to the 
child’s breathing during sleep 
Polysomnographic studies 

The PSG (PolyG; CNS Inc., Chanhassen, MN, USA) 
included oronasal airflow (thermister), chest and abdominal 
impedance plethysmography, pulse oximetry 
and electrocardiogram. The child’s sleep behaviour and 
respiratory pattern were also continuously observed and 
recorded by a special nurse trained in PSG. The PSG 
respiratory events were visually reviewed and manually 
edited by the first author, who was not aware of any 
questionnaire results. Obstructive apnoea (OA) was 
defined as cessation of oronasal airflow associated with 
the out-of-phase movement of the rib cage and abdomen 
(6). The number and duration of OA lasting for two or 
more consecutive breaths were determined (6, 9). Total 
sleep time of each child was based on the nurse’s 
observations. The obstructive apnoea index (OAI), 
defined as the number of OAs per hour of sleep, was 
calculated. We defined the arterial oxygen saturation 
(SpO2) nadir as that measured by pulse oximetry while 
the patient was asleep, without any movement artifact, 
and where the pulse rate detected by the oximeter was 
comparable to the heart rate detected by electrocardiography. 
The out-of-phase movement of the rib cage and 
abdomen indicating airway obstruction was determined 
by the display of PSG tracings corresponding with the 
nurse’s observation. 

The child was considered to have OSAS if the OAI 
was greater than one per hour of total sleep time (6, 10) 
or if desaturation episodes (oxygen saturation <90%) 

Parents’ observations in childhood obstructive sleep apnoea 709 

were associated with the presence of OA and/or the out-
of-phase movement of the rib cage and abdomen, 
indicating partial airway obstruction (6). Children 
whose PSG findings did not meet the criteria of OSAS 
were excluded from the study. Since there was no 
consensus on guidelines for rating the severity of 
childhood OSAS based on PSG findings, we classified 
children with SpO2 nadir <75% and/or an OAI >10 per 
hour of sleep time as having severe OSAS. Those who 
did not meet the criteria of severe OSAS were classified 
as having non-severe OSAS. 

Statistical analysis 

Nominal and ordinal variables were compared between 
the two groups and analysed using the Chi-squared or 
Fisher’s exact test for 2 . 
2 tables (Epi Info 6, World 
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1994). Two-
tailed t-tests were used for comparing continuous 
variables (SPSS for Windows 7.52, SPSS Inc, USA, 
1997). Means are presented as mean (SD). A probability 
value of less than 0.05 was considered significant. The 
sensitivity, specificity and positive and negative predictive 
values of the observation that showed statistically 
significant differences between the severe and 
non-severe groups were calculated using standard 
formulas (11). 

Results 

Sixty-five children met the PSG criteria of OSAS. 
Twenty-eight patients were classified as having severe 
OSAS and 37 as non-severe OSAS. Demographic data 
and PSG findings are given in Table 1. There were no 
significant statistical differences between severe and 
non-severe OSAS with respect to age, sex or body mass 
index. The male to female ratio was approximately 5 to 
1 in both groups. All patients snored. 

By definition, the SpO2 nadir of the severe group was 
statistically less than those of the non-severe group 

Table 1. Patient demographics and polysomnographic findings. 

Severe OSAS Non-severe OSAS 
(n = 28) (n = 37) 
Age 
Mean (y) 5.1 (SD 3.1) 5.8 (SD 3.0) 
Range (y) 1.9–13.4 2.0–13.4 
Sex (M: F) 23: 5 31: 6 
BMI 23.1 (SD 9.7) 20.2 (SD 6.5) 
Total sleep time (h) 6.1 (SD 1.5) 6.3 (SD 1.8) 
Peak SpO2 (%) 99 (SD 1) 100 (SD 1) 
SpO2 nadir (%) 64 (SD 10)* 84 (SD 4) 
Obstructive apnoea index 7.6 (SD 6.0)* 2.9 (SD 2.0) 
Average duration of 12.5 (SD 8.5) 9.2 (SD 5.5) 
obstructive apnoea (sec) 

*Values demonstrating a significant difference between groups (two


tailed t-test, p . 
0.01). 
SpO2 = Arterial oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry. 
BMI = Body mass index (weight in kilograms/height in meters2). 


710 A Preutthipan et al. 
ACTA PÆDIATR 89 (2000) 

Fig. 1. The oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (SpO2) 
nadir of children with severe versus non-severe obstructive sleep 
apnoea syndrome (OSAS) (p <0.01). Thick horizontal lines = mean 
values; thin horizontal lines = mean SD values. 


Fig. 2. The obstructive apnoea index (OAI), defined as the number of 
obstructive apnoea per hour of sleep, in children with severe versus 
non-severe obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) (p <0.01). 
Thick horizontal lines = mean values; thin horizontal lines = 
mean SD values. 


(p . 
0.01) (Fig. 1). The OAI of the severe group was 
statistically greater than the non-severe group 
(p . 
0.01) (Fig. 2). The average duration of OA did 
not differ significantly between the two groups (Table 
1). 

The parents’ observations obtained from the questionnaires 
are given in Table 2. Parental observations of 
“observed cyanosis”, “observed OA” and “snoring 
extremely loud” were significantly greater in the severe 
group. “Observed cyanosis” was the least common 
parental observation in the non-severe group. In the 
severe group, “shaking the child to make him or her 
breathe” was nearly twice as frequent as those in the 
non-severe group. “Watching the child sleeping, afraid 
about his or her breathing” was present in 85% and 60% 

Table 2. Parents’ observations during sleep of severe vs. non-severe 
OSAS. 

Severe Non-severe 
(%) (%) p-value 

Observed cyanosis (63) 35 8 0.02 
Observed obstructive apnoea (65) 61 35 0.04 
Observed child struggling to 85 84 NS 

breathe (64) 
Snoring extremely loudly (64) 52 22 0.01 
Snores “most nights” (65) 86 73 NS 
Excessive movement (64) 19 11 NS 
Nocturnal sweating most nights 50 32 NS 

(65) 
Mouth breathing “every night” 29 54 0.04 
(65) 
Shakes child to make him/her 64 35 0.02 
breathe (65) 
Watches child sleeping, afraid 
85 60 0.03 
about breathing (64) 

*Number of subjects in parentheses; NS = not significant. 

of the severe and non-severe OSAS, respectively. These 
two parental responses to the child’s breathing were 
significantly more prevalent in the severe group. It 
should be noted that “mouth breathing every night” was 
surprisingly less in the severe group. 

Table 3 gives the sensitivity, specificity, positive and 
negative predictive values of five significant questions. 
“Watching the child, afraid about breathing” had the 
highest sensitivity (85%) and negative predictive value 
(79%), but its specificity was only 41%. “Observed 
cyanosis” had the highest specificity (92%) and positive 
predictive value (75%), but its sensitivity was only 
35%. “Observed cyanosis” and “snoring extremely 
loud” were two observations that showed the highest 
values for specificity. When these two observations 
were combined, the specificity increased to 100%, but 
the sensitivity dropped to 15.4%. Neither any single nor 
combinations of observations showed high values for 
both sensitivity and specificity. None had positive or 
negative predictive values close to 100%. 

Discussion 

This study examined whether parents’ observations of a 
child’s sleep could be used to predict the severity of 
OSAS in children. We have found that parents of 
children with severe OSAS were more likely to report 
observed cyanosis, OA or extremely loud snoring than 
parents of the non-severe group. In addition, parents of 
children with severe OSAS were more frightened by the 
child’s breathing difficulties, as shown by the more 
prevalent reports of watching and shaking the child 
during sleep in the severe group, than parents of the 
non-severe group. 


ACTA PÆDIATR 89 (2000) Parents’ observations in childhood obstructive sleep apnoea 711 
Table 3. Validity of parents’ observations in predicting severe OSAS. 

Sensitivity Specificity Positive predictive value Negative predictive value 
(%) (%) (%) (%) 

Observed cyanosis 35 92 75 67 
Observed obstructive apnoea 61 65 57 69 
Snoring extremely loudly 52 78 64 69 
Shakes child to make him/her breathe 64 65 58 71 
Watches child sleeping, afraid about breathing 85 41 51 79 

Our results are similar to those of a previous study 
examining the value of the clinical history in distinguishing 
primary snoring from OSAS in children (9). 
They found that parents’ observations and interventions, 
including observed OA, shaking the child and 
watching the child during sleep, were statistically more 
prevalent in OSAS than in primary snoring (9). In our 
study, these three particular observations were also 
found to be statistically more common in the severe 
OSAS than in the non-severe group. Accordingly, 
children whose parents report these observations 
probably have more serious OSAS than those without 
them. 

Of all parents’ observations, “watching the child, 
afraid about breathing” had the highest sensitivity, 
indicating that 85% of children with severe OSAS 
would be correctly identified by this observation. 
However, because of its low specificity, nearly 60% 
of children with non-severe OSAS would be falsely 
labelled as severe OSAS. Parents’ observation of 
cyanosis is highly specific, but is insensitive for severe 
OSAS. When negative, 92% of children with non-
severe OSAS would be accurately identified as non-
severe OSAS. However, because of its low sensitivity, 
only 35% of children with severe OSAS would be 
correctly identified as having severe OSAS by this 
observation. Neither any single nor combinations of 
observations had sufficient sensitivity and specificity to 
identify severe OSAS. None had high values for 
positive and negative predictive values. Thus, considering 
parents’ observations alone does not precisely 
predict the severity of OSAS in children. The data in 
this study confirm the crucial role of PSG in assessing 
the severity of OSAS in children, as recommended by 
the American Thoracic Society (6). 

Parents in our study, compared with those reported by 
Caroll et al., more frequently reported observed 
cyanosis. We found that observed cyanosis was reported 
in 34.6% and 8.1% of the severe and non-severe groups, 
respectively. In the study by Caroll et al. (9), cyanosis 
was observed only in 6% of the entire OSAS group. The 
higher prevalence of observed cyanosis may have been 
due to our studied patients having more severe 
desaturation, as demonstrated by the lower mean value 
of the SpO2 nadir. 

One surprising finding was that “mouth-breathing 
every night” was reported half as commonly in the 
severe OSAS compared to the non-severe group. A 
previous study by Nieminen et al. (12) showed that 

mouth-breathing during sleep was equally common in 
children with OSAS as in those without OSAS. This 
suggests that mouth-breathing during sleep is of little 
help in predicting the severity of OSAS. 

In contrast to other studies in children (5, 13), we 
found a preponderance of boys in the Thai children with 
OSAS. The overall male to female ratio was 5 to 1, 
which is comparable to our previous finding (4). In 
Western countries, OSAS in children occurs equally 
amongst boys and girls (1, 14), whereas in adults it 
occurs predominantly in males (15, 16). The difference 
in sex ratios between Thai and Caucasian children 
requires further investigation. However, since our 
hospital statistical report revealed that, in 1998, the 
male to female ratio of children attending the general 
paediatric clinic was 1.2 to 1, a cultural selection bias is 
unlikely to be the cause of the extreme male preponderance 
in our OSAS children. 

The limitation of the PSG device used in this study 
must be recognized. It did not measure electroencephalograms 
or end tidal CO2. The total sleep time of all 
children was quantitated by direct nursing observations 
of sleep versus wakefulness. The magnitude of both 
sleep fragmentation and hypoventilation was unknown. 
Nevertheless, we were able to grade the severity of 
OSAS by demonstrating the presence and numbers of 
OA, oxygen desaturation and the out-of-phase movement 
of the rib cage and abdomen. The PSG device 
(PolyG1) used in this study has been assessed for 
accuracy by comparing the results with a gold standard 
PSG. It was shown that the accuracy of this device was 
greater than 90% (17). We trained a team of special 
paediatric nurses to provide us with additional important 
information regarding OSAS, including sleep 
versus wakefulness and the presence of the out-ofphase 
movement of the rib cage and abdomen. The 
combined information obtained from the attending 
nurses and the PSG data, which had been manually 
edited and scored, would thus be adequate to diagnose 
and classify the severity of OSAS. To our knowledge, 
there is no consensus for grading the severity of OSAS 
in children. In adults, the severity of OSAS is mainly 
based on the number of the OAI (15, 18). In children, 
the OAI exceeding 1 per hour of sleep time is 
considered abnormal, indicating that the child has 
OSAS (6). As such, it is reasonable to classify a child 
with OAI >10 per hour of sleep time as having severe 
OSAS. 

In conclusion, parents of children with severe OSAS 


712 A Preutthipan et al. 

are more likely to report observed cyanosis, OA and 
extremely loud snoring. They more frequently shake 
and watch their child during sleep and are afraid of the 
child’s breathing at night. However, neither any single 
nor combinations of observations can confidently 
predict severe OSAS. Thus, children still require overnight 
PSG to assess the severity of OSAS. 

Acknowledgements.—We are grateful to Dr Carole Marcus for her advice 
and critical review of this manuscript. We thank Wanchai Tachatagkiyapan, 
Tipsuda Thavaramara, Metta Kum-in, Suputchrin Meesawadkul and 
Ammarin Thakkinstian for their efficient assistance. This study was 
supported by the Ramathibodi Foundation and conducted at the Clinical 
Research Ward, Ramathibodi Hospital. 

References 

1. Guilleminault C, Korobkin R, Winkle R. A review of 50 children 
with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Lung 1981; 159: 275–87 
2. Brouillette RT, Fernbach SK, Hunt CE. Obstructive sleep apnea 
in infants and children. J Pediatr 1982; 100: 31–40 
3. Bradley TD, Phillipson EA. Pathogenesis and pathophysiology 
of the obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Med Clin North Am 
1985; 69: 1169–85 
4. Preutthipan A, Suwanjutha S, Chantarojanasiri T. Obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome in Thai children diagnosed by polysomnography. 
Southeast Asian J Trop Med Public Health 1997; 28: 
62–8 
5. Leach J, Olson J, Hermann J, Manning S. Polysomnographic and 
clinical findings in children with obstructive sleep apnea. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992; 118: 741–4 
6. American Thoracic Society. Medical Section of American Lung 
Association. Standards and indications for cardiopulmonary 
sleep studies in children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 
153: 866–78 
ACTA PÆDIATR 89 (2000) 

7. He 
J, Kryger M, Zorick F. Mortality and apnea index in 
obstructive sleep apnea. Chest 1988; 89: 331–4 
8. Brouillette R, Hanson D, David R, Klemka L, Szatkowski A, 
Fernbach S, et al. A diagnostic approach to suspected obstructive 
sleep apnea in children. J Pediatr 1984; 105: 10–4 
9. Caroll JL, McColley SA, Marcus CL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM. 
Inability of clinical history to distinguish primary snoring from 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in children. Chest 1995; 101: 
610–8 
10. Marcus CL, Omlin KJ, Basinki DJ, Bailey SL, Rachal AB, Von 
Pechmann WS, et al. Normal polysomnographic values for 
children and adolescents. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 146: 1234–9 
11. Fletcher RH, Fletcher SW, Wagner EH. Clinical epidemiology: 
the essentials, 2nd ed. London: Williams & Wilkins, 1988 
12. Nieminen P, Tolonen U, Lopponen H, Lopponen T, Luotonen J, 
Jokinen K. Snoring children: factors predicting sleep apnea. Acta 
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1997; Suppl 529: 190–4 
13. Gozal D, Marcus CL, Keens TG, Ward SLD. Characteristics and 
polysomnographic abnormalities of children with the obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome [Abstract]. Pediatr Pulmonol 1991; 11: 
372 
14. Frank Y, Kravath RE, Pollak CP, Weitzman ED. Obstructive 
sleep apnea and its therapy: clinical and polysomnogrphic 
manifestations. Pediatrics 1983; 71: 737–42 
15. Strohl KP, Redline S. Recognition of obstructive sleep apnea. 
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996; 154: 279–89 
16. Young T, Palta M, Dempsey J, Skatrud J, Weber S, Badr S. The 
occurrence of sleep-disordered breathing among middle-aged 
adults. N Engl J Med 1993; 328: 1230–5 
17. Man GCW. Validation of 
a portable sleep apnea monitoring 
device (PolyG1). Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994; 149: A51 
18. Berry DTR, Webb WB, Block AJ. Sleep apnea syndrome. A 
critical review of the apnea index as a diagnostic criterion. Chest 
1984; 86: 529–31 
Received July 15, 1999; revision received Nov. 22, 1999; accepted 
Jan. 12, 2000 


