Pediatric Pulmonology 27:403–409 (1999) 

Clinical Features of Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
Hypoventilation Syndrome in Otherwise 
Healthy Children 


Carol L. Rosen, MD* 

Summary. Obstructive sleep apnea hypoventilation syndrome (OSAHS) is an important public 
health problem. However, major gaps exist in our knowledge about the clinical features of this 
disorder in the pediatric age group. The purpose of this study was to examine clinical features 
of OSAHS diagnosed by polysomnography in otherwise healthy children. In this cross-sectional 
study, 326 children without underlying medical conditions (5.8 ± 3.0 years, range 1–12 years; 
56% male) were recruited from patients referred by primary care and otorhinolaryngology physicians 
for evaluation of snoring and difficulty breathing. Ethnic group distribution was African-
American (38%), Caucasian (30%), and Hispanic (31%). Complaints of daytime tiredness or 
sleepiness were reported in 29% of the children. All children underwent overnight polysomnography 
(N = 330 studies). 

OSAHS was diagnosed in 59% of the children, based on polysomnographic criteria. The 
remaining children had either primary snoring (25%); no snoring (10%), or upper airway resistance 
syndrome (6%). Neither male gender nor obesity increased the likelihood for the diagnosis 
of OSAHS. However, the incidence of obesity in the study population (28%) was more than twice 
that of the general pediatric population. African-American children had a greater likelihood for 
OSAHS diagnosis compared to Hispanic or Caucasian children. Daytime complaints of sleepiness 
or tiredness were not more common in children diagnosed with OSAHS than in the children 
without OSAHS. As expected, tonsillar hypertrophy increased the likelihood of OSAHS diagnosis. 
In summary, many of the clinical features of childhood OSAHS are in marked contrast to 
those in adults. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1999;27:403–409. © 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 

Key words: 
child; comparative study; polysomnography; sleep apnea syndromes; 
sleep disordered breathing. 

INTRODUCTION 
gender and obesity are major risk factors for the diagnosis 
of obstructive sleep apnea.8 In children, these clinical 

Obstructive sleep apnea hypoventilation syndrome 

features are not well-known, and polysomnographic 

(OSAHS) is an important public health problem that is 

documentation of OSAHS is often absent. In contrast to 

well characterized in adults. However, major gaps exist 

adults, the majority of children with OSAHS have ad-

in our knowledge about this disorder in the pediatric age 

enotonsillar hypertrophy and improve following adeno


group. OSAHS is identified by recurrent episodes of 

complete and/or partial airway obstruction during sleep 
Section of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Yale Uni


that result in intermittent hypoxemia and hypercapnia, 

versity School of Medicine and the Children’s Sleep Laboratory in the 

recurrent arousals, and sleep disruption. These distur


Children’s Clinical Research Center, Yale-New Haven Hospital, New 

bances can be associated with daytime sequelae includ-

Haven, Connecticut. 

ing daytime sleepiness, behavioral and neurocognitive 

problems.1 
Presented at the American Thoracic Society Meeting, April, 1998. 

Habitual snoring occurs in 7–12% of children and is 

Grant sponsor: Yale Children’s Clinical Research Center; Grant num


the most common presenting symptom of OSAHS.2–6 

ber: M01-RR06022; Grant Sponsor: General Clinical Research Cen-

However, not all snoring children have OSAHS. In most 

ters Program, National Center for Research Resources, NIH. 

children, snoring occurs in the absence of apnea, hy


poventilation, hypoxemia, sleep disturbance, or daytime 
*Correspondence to: Carol L. Rosen, M.D., Section of Respiratory 
Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medi


symptoms (primary snoring). In contrast, OSAHS is as-

cine, 333 Cedar St., P.O. Box 208064, New Haven, CT 06520-8064. 

sociated with physiologic abnormalities such as hypox


E-mail: carol.rosen@yale.edu 

emia, hypoventilation, sleep disruption, or daytime sequelae, 
and occurs in 1–3% of children.6,7 In adults, male Received 8 September 1998; Accepted 22 January 1999. 


© 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc. 


404 Rosen 

tonsillectomy.1 Although many normal children have adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy, a relative minority develop obstructive 
sleep apnea. Craniofacial, genetic, and 
neuromuscular disorders such as trisomy 21, achondroplasia, 
Pierre Robin anomalad, and cerebral palsy are 
major risk factors for childhood OSAHS, but these conditions 
are relatively rare.1 The purpose of this study was 
to examine the clinical features of OSAHS documented 
by polysomnography in otherwise healthy children referred 
for suspected OSAHS, but without underlying 
medical conditions. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

The study population included 326 otherwise healthy 
children, aged 1–12 years, and identified within the data 
base for polysomnography at the Children’s Sleep Laboratory 
in the Children’s Clinical Research Center of Yale 
New-Haven Hospital. All children had been referred to 
the pediatric respiratory medicine clinic at Yale University 
by primary care and otorhinolaryngology physicians 
for evaluation of snoring and difficulty breathing during 
sleep between 1990 and the present. Exclusion criteria 
were: children less than 1 year of age, craniofacial 
anomalies, genetic syndromes, neuromuscular disorders, 
mental retardation, chronic cardiorespiratory problems, 
and prior upper airway surgery. Since the sample population 
included only one Asian patient, this patient’s data 
were excluded from the final analysis. 

An interview using a standardized sleep and breathing 
questionnaire2 was completed by the investigator or a 
physician colleague. For most questions, numerical 
scores were assigned to each of the answers, ranging 
from 0 (never); 1 (rarely: less than once a month); 2 
(occasionally: 1–4 times a month); 3 (frequently: more 
than once a week); to 4 (almost always: most days). The 
interview included questions such as: 

1. How often does your child snore at night? 
2. Does your child struggle to breathe during sleep? 
3. Does your child stop breathing at night, i.e., try to 
breathe, but no air comes out? 
4. Does your child complain of feeling tired all day? 
5. Does your child fall asleep during the day, either at 
school or after school? 
The following question was answered by “yes or no”: 

Abbreviations 

EtCO2 End-tidal carbon dioxide tension 
OSAHS Obstructive sleep apnea hypoventilation syndrome 
SpO2 Oxyhemoglobin saturation by pulse oximetry 
UARS Upper airway resistance syndrome 

6. Has there been any recent change in your child’s behavior, 
personality, or school performance? 
An OSAHS symptom score as described by Brouillette 
et al was determined for each child.2 

Ethnic group was defined on the basis of physician 
observation of parent and child. Growth parameters were 
obtained using standard growth charts (National Center 
for Health Statistics) and were expressed as a percentage 
of ideal weight for height.9 Children were defined as 
obese if their ideal body weight was greater than 120% of 
ideal weight for height, or if their body mass index was 
greater than the 95th percentile for age.10,11 Failure to 
thrive was defined by weight less than 80% of ideal 
weight for height. Tonsil size was rated using a visual 
scoring system of 0–4+.12 Receipt of medical assistance 
vs. private insurance was used as a crude indicator of 
socioeconomic status. 

Overnight sleep studies began at the child’s usual bedtime 
and used polysomnographic techniques previously 
described for assessment of OSAHS in children.13,14 
Continuously recorded signals included: electroencephalography; 
electrooculography; electromyography by sub-
mental and tibial electrodes; electrocardiography; oronasal 
airflow; thoracic and abdominal effort by inductance 
plethysmography; oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry 
(SpO2); end-tidal carbon dioxide tensions (EtCO2) measured 
by infrared capnometry of nasal airflow; and tracheal 
sound recording by a neck microphone. Each signal 
was appropriately digitized and stored on disk for computer-
assisted data analysis. Children were recorded on 
videotape using an infrared video camera, and were continuously 
observed by a sleep technician. 

Analyses 

Obstructive apnea was defined as the presence of chest 
and abdominal wall motion in the absence of airflow. All 
obstructive apneas longer than two breath cycles were 
counted.15,16 The obstructive apnea index was defined as 
the number of obstructive apneas per hour of sleep. Hypopneas 
were not quantitated, since standardized criteria 
for their definition in children are lacking.17 SpO2 nadir 
and mean were determined. Oximetry data with artifacts 
in the pulse waveform tracings were discarded. Oxyhemoglobin 
desaturation episodes were defined as periods 
associated with a 4% or more reduction from the prior 
10-s baseline. Reductions in SpO2 were reported as indices, 
i.e., the number of events per hour of total sleep 

time. The mean and peak EtCO2 and the percentage of 
total sleep time when EtCO2 values were greater than or 
equal to 50 mm Hg were measured. Values below 30 mm 
Hg or with poor alveolar plateaus were considered artifacts, 
and discarded. 

Polysomnography remains the gold standard for diag



Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypoventilation Syndrome 405 

nostic investigation, but universally accepted diagnostic 
criteria for OSAHS in children are lacking, and normative 
data are limited.15,16,18 Polysomnographic studies 
were considered abnormal when they included one or 
more of the following deviations from normal pediatric 
sleep and breathing data.1,13,15 

1. Obstructive apnea index $1 event per hour; 
2. 4% desaturation episodes of more than 1.5 events per 
hour or SpO2 nadir less than 92%; 
3. Hypoventilation as indicated by EtCO2 values $50 
mm Hg for greater than 9% of total sleep time, or peak 
EtCO2 values of 55 mm Hg or greater. 
Other evidence supporting the diagnosis of OSAHS 
came from the sleep technician’s log, review of the video 
tape, and examination of the polysomnographic record. 
These included: 

1. Snoring; 
2. Labored breathing indicated by marked paradoxical 
inward movement of the chest, sternal retractions or 
use of accessory muscles of respiration; 
3. Frequent arousals or awakenings from sleep associated 
with snoring, increasing respiratory efforts, and 
partial obstructions. 
Most children had multiple clinical and polysomnographic 
features of OSAHS. In obese children, rare transient 
desaturations to less than 92% saturation, particularly 
during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, were not 
considered diagnostic of obstructive sleep apnea in the 
absence of other evidence for obstruction or hypoventilation. 
The records were scored by physicians who knew 
the characteristics of the subject. However, the analyses 
of clinical features were performed long after scoring 
was completed. 

The polysomnographic findings were stratified into 
five severity groups similar to those suggested by Brouillette 
and Waters:19 no snore, no snoring, apnea, desaturation, 
or hypoventilation; snore, snoring without apnea, 
desaturation, or hypoventilation; upper airway resistance 
syndrome, snoring with marked paradoxical inward chest 
movements or repetitive arousals and movements, but 
without apnea, desaturation, or hypoventilation; obstructive 
sleep apnea, snoring with apnea and/or hypercapnia, 
but without desaturation; and hypoxemia with obstructive 
sleep apnea, snoring with desaturation and apnea, with or 
without hypercapnia. 

The protocol was approved by the institutional review 
board of Yale University, and parental informed written 
consent was obtained. 

Statistics 

All results are expressed as means ± SD where appropriate. 
Medians and interquartile ranges were used as 

descriptive statistics for variables with a skewed distribution. 
Differences between groups were compared using 
analysis of variance for continuous data, Chi-square 
analysis for categorical data, and Mann-Whitney rank-
sum or Kruskal-Wallis tests for data not normally distributed. 
The diagnosis of OSAHS was considered the 
primary outcome variable. Predictors for OSAHS were 
identified using multivariate logistic regression with independent 
variables: ethnic group, gender, age, percent 
ideal body weight, 3+ or 4+ tonsil size, and medical 
assistance status. Multivariate odds ratios were used to 
measure the strength of the association between OSAHS 
and these clinical features. P < 0.05 was considered significant 
except for multiple comparisons, in which case 
an appropriate post hoc test was performed. 

RESULTS 
Patient Characteristics 

The study population of 326 children included several 
ethnic groups: African-American (38%), Caucasian 
(30%), and Hispanic (31%). The mean age was 5.8 ± 3.0 
years (range, 1–12 years), with the majority of children 
of either preschool or school age. Slightly more than half 
the children were male (56%). Obesity was present in 
more than one quarter of the study population (28%). The 
mean percent ideal body weight for height was 119 ± 
37%. The percent ideal body weight was similar for each 
ethnic and gender group. None of the children presented 
with failure to thrive. There were no ethnic group differences 
for age, gender, or percentage of obese children. 
Sixty-six percent of the children were receiving medical 
assistance. This percentage was significantly higher in 
the non-Caucasian groups (81%) compared to the Caucasian 
group (30%). With regard to gender, there were no 
differences for age, ethnic group, obesity, percent ideal 
body weight, or medical assistance status. Habitual snoring 
was reported by parents in 99% of children, difficulty 
breathing in 80%, and witnessed obstructive apnea in 
59%. Parental complaints of daily tiredness occurred in 
19%, excessive daytime sleepiness occurred in 10%, and 
behavioral, school, or mood problems were reported in 
9% of children. Although the OSAHS symptom scores 
were higher in the African-American compared to both 
Hispanic and Caucasian children (P < 0.01), there was 
marked overlap of these scores between ethnic groups 
(Fig. 1). The scores of Hispanic and Caucasian children 
were not significantly different. Tonsillar enlargement 
was common, with two thirds of the children described as 
having 3 or 4+ tonsils. 

Polysomnographic Findings 

There were 330 polysomnographic studies in the 326 
study children. Four children whose initial study was not 


406 Rosen 

Fig. 1. OSAHS symptom scores in each ethnic group. Note: in 
the original publication of this score,2 a symptom score less 
than (-1) indicated no OSAHS; from (-1) to 3.5 was indetermi-
nate; and ³ 3.5 indicated OSAHS. 


diagnostic of obstructive sleep apnea were restudied 5, 
11, 33, and 48 months later because of persistent symptoms. 
These repeat studies resulted in a change in diagnosis 
in all four children. The polysomnographic data 
were initially stratified into five severity groups: no snore 
(10%), snore (25%), upper airway resistance syndrome 
(UARS) (6%), obstructive apnea (16%), and hypoxemia 
with obstructive apnea (43%).19 Respiratory and gas exchange 
data for each OSAHS diagnostic category are 
shown in Figure 2. Of note, the apnea indices are much 
lower than those reported in adults.20 This occurred because 
many children have a clinical picture of continuous 
partial obstruction rather than repetitive discrete obstructive 
apnea events. Some very obese children in the snoring 
group had transient oxyhemoglobin desaturation 
events, especially in REM sleep, without other evidence 
of obstruction. 

Pediatric OSAHS has been best characterized in terms 
of respiratory abnormalities.21 Since the greatest number 
of polysomnographic respiratory abnormalities were 
found in the children with obstructive apnea ± hypoxemia 
groups, these two severity groups were collapsed 
into the OSAHS final diagnosis category (59%) to simplify 
further analyses. The three remaining severity 
groups with lesser findings (no snore, snore and UARS) 
were collapsed into the non-OSAHS final diagnosis category 
(41%). 

OSAHS was more likely to be diagnosed in African-
American children (75%) compared with Hispanic (51%) 
or Caucasian (47%) children. Multivariate odds ratios 
(including variables for race, gender, percent ideal body 
weight, tonsillar enlargement, medical assistance, OSAHS 
symptom score, and parental complaints of tiredness or 
sleepiness) showed that African-American children were 
more than three times more likely to be diagnosed with 
OSAHS than Hispanic children (odds ratio, 3.3; P . 
0.003; 95% confidence interval, 1.7–6.3) or Caucasian 

children (odds ratio, 3.0; P . 
0.007; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.6–5.8). The odds ratio for Hispanic compared 
to Caucasian children was not significantly different. In 
marked contrast to adult obstructive sleep apnea, neither 
male gender (55% in the OSAHS compared with 59% in 
the non-OSAHS children), nor obesity (26% in OSAHS 
compared with 30% in non-OSAHS children), increased 
the likelihood for OSAHS diagnosis in the study children. 
A symptom score $3.5 had a sensitivity of 47%, a 
specificity of 28%, a positive predictive value of 76%, 
and a negative predictive value of 67%. However, 47% 
of the children had symptom scores in the indeterminate 
range, and 55% of those had OSAHS diagnosed by polysomnography. 
As expected, the presence of 3–4+ tonsillar 
hypertrophy increased the likelihood for diagnosis of 
OSAHS (75% in OSAHS, compared with 57% in non-
OSAHS children; odds ratio, 2.6; confidence interval, 
1.5–4.3; P . 
0.0003). 

DISCUSSION 

This study demonstrates several important differences 
between childhood and adult OSAHS in a large population 
of symptomatic but otherwise healthy children in 
whom the presence and severity of OSAHS were confirmed 
by overnight polysomnography. First, gender distribution 
was nearly equal in both the original referral 
population and in those children subsequently diagnosed 
with OSAHS. Several population-based studies confirmed 
the absence of gender differences in the prevalence 
of snoring in children based on questionnaire 
data.3–5,7 This study is the first large series showing a 
similar gender distribution in children with polysomnographic 
confirmation of OSAHS. Pediatric practitioners 
should recognize that girls are just as likely to have 
OSAHS as boys, and they should consider that diagnosis. 

A second finding was that the presence of obesity did 
not increase the likelihood of OSAHS diagnosis in this 
referral population. Of note, 28% of the initial study 
population and 26% of the children diagnosed with 
OSAHS were obese. Of great concern from a public 
health perspective, is that these percentages are more 
than double the prevalence of obesity in the general 
childhood population of 10.9%.11 One possible explanation 
for this high percentage of obese children is that the 
referring sources may have been biased into linking obesity 
to risk of OSAHS based on the adult experience. In 
a previous pediatric study, investigators suggested that 
the combination of an ideal body weight greater than 
200% and adenotonsillar hypertrophy warranted an 
evaluation for possible OSAHS.22 Further studies on the 
role of obesity in the development of childhood OSAHS 
are needed. 

In this referral population, African-American children 
had an increased likelihood for OSAHS diagnosis. This 


Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypoventilation Syndrome 407 


finding is particularly interesting in light of a recent 
population-based study of sleep disordered breathing 
in adults showing a higher prevalence in African-
Americans compared to Caucasians.23 Of note, the ethnic 
group differences were most evident in individuals 25 
years old or less, in whom sleep disordered breathing was 
almost twice as prevalent in African-Americans compared 
to Caucasians. Two previous pediatric studies that 
suggested an increased risk for OSAHS in African-
American children were based on highly selected patient 
populations.24,25 One literature review included only 
children whose obstructive sleep apnea was complicated 
by cor pulmonale.24 Ethnic group data were missing for 

Fig. 2. Box plots of respiratory and gas exchange measurements 
organized by polysomnographic diagnosis: No Snore, 
Snore, UARS, OSAHS, and Hypoxia & OSAHS. A: Obstructive 
apnea index. B: REM obstructive apnea index. C: 4% desaturation 
episodes. D: Minimum SpO2 value. E: Maximum EtCO2 
value. Each box encloses 50% of the data, with the median 
value of the variable displayed as a line within the box. The top 
and bottom of the box mark the limits of ±25% of the variable 
group. The lines extending from the top and bottom of each 
box mark the minimum and maximum values that are 1.5 times 
the interquartile distance between the upper and lower quartiles. 
Values outside of this range, i.e., outliers, are indicated 
by the open circles. Note: peak EtCO2 values were not available 
in 17 children because of near-continuous mouth breathing 
and absent nasal airflow. 

more than one quarter of the study population, and polysomnography 
was not performed. Another investigation 
which was a retrospective patient chart review did include 
polysomnographic data, but almost one half of the 
study population had underlying risk factors such as craniofacial, 
genetic, or neurologic disorders.25 

These ethnic-group differences for OSAHS were not 
explained by differences in age, gender, obesity, tonsil 
size, or medical assistance for health care. However, the 
study design limits the interpretation of these observations 
for several reasons. First, the study participants 
were part of an already symptomatic referral population 
to a subspecialty clinic from a variety of sources. Al



408 Rosen 

though the ethnic group distribution of the initial study 
population was similar, it is possible that the referrals 
were made based on ethnic or economic characteristics of 
the patient’s family. Medical assistance was used as a 
crude indicator of socioeconomic status, but it is not a 
valid measure of the socioeconomic differences that may 
exist in this study population. Case ascertainment bias 
could be present if families with higher parental education 
or from higher socioeconomic conditions sought earlier 
medical attention for milder symptoms. Although age 
of presentation for OSAHS evaluation was similar in the 
three ethnic groups, the higher symptom scores in African-
American children suggest that these children may 
have had more OSAHS symptoms at the time of presentation. 
However, the overlap of these scores between 
ethnic groups was nearly 100% (Fig. 1). Ethnic-group 
differences in exposure to other environmental factors 
not examined in this study, such as cigarette smoke or 
nasal allergen exposure might have accounted for the 
observed differences in this referral population.3,26 

An expected finding was that tonsillar hypertrophy, 
which reduces upper airway caliber, increased the likelihood 
for diagnosis of OSAHS. The peak age of childhood 
obstructive sleep apnea corresponds to the peak of 
adenotonsillar enlargement in relationship to airway 
size.27 Although the assessment of tonsillar enlargement 
was somewhat subjective, there were no ethnic group or 
gender differences in the proportions of children who had 
enlarged tonsils. 

With regard to clinical symptoms, daytime complaints 
of tiredness and sleepiness were much less common in 
pediatric compared to adult patients, and their presence 
did not increase the likelihood of OSAHS diagnosis. On 
the other hand, higher OSAHS symptom scores were 
associated with an increased likelihood of OSAHS diagnosis. 
The large overlap of these scores in children with 
OSAHS or lesser findings limits their diagnostic usefulness. 
Clinical evaluation has not been shown to reliably 
distinguish primary snoring from OSAHS or to predict 
OSAHS severity.14,28–32 

Finally, some readers may disagree with the definition 
of UARS used in this report. The term UARS typically 
refers to arousals, sleep disruption, or daytime symptoms 
associated with partial obstruction and increased esophageal 
pressure swings.33,34 UARS has been used to describe 
children with this clinical picture in the absence of 
esophageal pressure monitoring.35 Although esophageal 
pressure monitoring is unlikely to become a standard 
diagnostic tool for OSAHS in children because it is so 
invasive, UARS is often considered as part of the clinical 
spectrum of OSAHS for treatment purposes. Therefore, 
some readers may disagree with the decision to include 
the small proportion of UARS patients with lesser polysomnographic 
findings in the “non-OSAHS” diagnostic 
category for the purposes of data analysis. When the data 

were reanalyzed to include UARS in the OSAHS diagnostic 
category, the study results were unchanged. 

In summary, this study demonstrates that typical adult 
risk factors for OSAHS such as gender and obesity did 
not increase the likelihood of diagnosing childhood 
OSAHS in this study population. However, the incidence 
of obesity in this referral population was twice that of the 
general population. The increased likelihood for diagnosis 
of OSAHS in African-American children in this referral 
population is intriguing, but should not be over-
interpreted because of limitations in the study design. 
Further community-based and longitudinal studies are 
needed to confirm these findings and to address longer-
term questions about the natural history of childhood 
OSAHS and its relationship to sleep disordered breathing 
in adulthood. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We gratefully acknowledge the technical help of Chris 
Sega, Ronda Golding, and Mary Riggio; the computer 
and biomedical engineering expertise of Mark Rosen, 
Ph.D.; the interactions with Yale students from the undergraduate 
epidemiology course; the statistical assistance 
of Gene Fisch, Ph.D.; and the manuscript review by 
Gabriel Haddad, M.D. 

REFERENCES 

1. Carroll JL. Sleep-related upper-airway obstruction in children and 
adolescents. Child Adolesc Psych Clin North Am 1996;5:617– 
647. 
2. Brouillette R, Hanson D, David R, Klemka L, Szatkowski A, 
Fernbach S. A diagnostic approach to suspected obstructive sleep 
apnea in children. J Pediatr 1984;105:10–14. 
3. Corbo GM, Fuciarelli F, Foresi A, De Benedetto F. Snoring in 
children: association with respiratory symptoms and passive 
smoking. Br Med J [Clin Res] 1989;299:1491–1494. 
4. Teculescu DB, Caillier I, Perrin P, Rebstock E, Rauch A. Snoring 
in French preschool children. Pediatr Pulmonol 1992;13:239–244. 
5. Ali NJ, Pitson DJ, Stradling JR. Snoring, sleep disturbance, and 
behavior in 4–5 years olds. Arch Dis Child 1993;68:360–366. 
6. Ali NJ, Pitson D, Stradling JR. Natural history of snoring and 
related behaviour problems between the ages of 4 and 7 years. 
Arch Dis Child 1994;71:74–76. 
7. Gislason T, Benediktsdottir B. Snoring, apneic episodes, and nocturnal 
hypoxemia among children 6 months to 6 years old. An 
epidemiologic study of lower limit of prevalence. Chest 1995;107: 
963–966. 
8. Strohl KP, Redline S. Recognition of obstructive sleep apnea. Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154:279–289. 
9. Dietz WH, Robinson TN. Assessment and treatment of childhood 
obesity. Pediatr Rev 1993;14:337–343. 
10. Hammer LD, Kraemer HC, Wilson DM, Ritter PL, Dornbusch 
SM. Standardized percentile curves of body-mass index for children 
and adolescents. Am J Dis Child 1991;145:259–263. 
11. Troiano RP, Flegal KM, Kuczmarski RJ, Campbell SM, Johnson 
CL. Overweight prevalence and trends for children and adolescents. 
The National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, 
1963 to 1991. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1995;149:1085–1091. 

Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypoventilation Syndrome 409 

12. Schwartz R, Seid A, Stool S. T&A does not mean Time and 
Again. Contemp Pediatr 1992;9:18–46. 
13. Rosen CL, D’Andrea L, Haddad GG. Adult criteria for obstructive 
sleep apnea do not identify children with serious obstruction. Am 
Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:1231–1234. 
14. Carroll JL, McColley SA, Marcus CL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM. 
Inability of clinical history to distinguish primary snoring from 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in children. Chest 1995;108: 
610–618. 
15. Marcus CL, Omlin KJ, Basinki DJ, Bailey SL, Rachal AB, Von 
Pechmann WS, Keens TG, Ward SL. Normal polysomnographic 
values for children and adolescents. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992; 
146:1235–1239. 
16. American Thoracic Society. Standards and indications for cardiopulmonary 
sleep studies in children. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
1996;153:866–878. 
17. Redline S, Sanders M. Hypopnea, a floating metric: implications 
for prevalence, morbidity estimates, and case finding. Sleep 1997; 
20:1209–1217. 
18. Gaultier C. Respiratory adaptation during sleep from the neonatal 
period to adolescence. In: Guilleminault C, editor. Sleep and its 
disorders in children. New York: Raven Press; 1987:67–98. 
19. Brouillette R, Waters K. Oxygen therapy for pediatric obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome: How safe? How effective? [editorial] Am 
J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153:1–2. 
20. Gaultier C. Sleep-related breathing disorders. 6. Obstructive sleep 
apnoea syndrome in infants and children: established facts and 
unsettled issues. Thorax 1995;50:1204–1210. 
21. Carroll JL, McColley SA, Marcus CL, Curtis S, Pyzik P, Loughlin 
GM. Can childhood obstructive sleep apnea be diagnosed by a 
clinical symptom score? Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;145:(A)179. 
22. Silvestri JM, Weese-Mayer DE, Bass MT, Kenny AS, Hauptman 
SA, Pearsall SM. Polysomnography in obese children with a history 
of sleep-associated breathing disorders. Pediatr Pulmonol 
1993;16:124–129. 
23. Redline S, Tishler PV, Hans MG, Tosteson TD, Strohl KP, Spry 
K. Racial differences in sleep-disordered breathing in African-
Americans and Caucasians. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155: 
186–192. 
24. Yonkers AJ, Spaur RC. Upper airway obstruction and the pharyngeal 
lymphoid tissue. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1987;20: 
235–239. 

25. Leach J, Olson J, Hermann J, Manning S. Polysomnographic and 
clinical findings in children with obstructive sleep apnea. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1992;118:741–744. 
26. McColley SA, Carroll JL, Curtis S, Loughlin GM, Sampson HA. 
High prevalence of allergic sensitization in children with habitual 
snoring and obstructive sleep apnea. Chest 1997;111:170–173. 
27. Linder-Aronson S. The development of the posterior nasopharyngeal 
wall in boys and girls between the ages of 3–16 years. A 
longitudinal study. Zahn Mund Kieferheilkd 1983;71:149–160. 
28. Goldstein NA, Sculerati N, Walsleben JA, Bhatia N, Friedman 
DM, Rapoport DM. Clinical diagnosis of pediatric obstructive 
sleep apnea validated by polysomnography. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1994;111:611–617. 
29. Suen JS, Arnold JE, Brooks LJ. Adenotonsillectomy for treatment 
of obstructive sleep apnea in children. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1995;121:525–530. 
30. Sanchez-Armengol A, Capote-Gil F, Cano-Gomez S, 
Ayerbe-
Garcia R, Delgado-Moreno F, Castillo-Gomez J. Polysomnographic 
studies in children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy and 
suspected obstructive sleep apnea. Pediatr Pulmonol 1996;22: 
101–105. 
31. Nieminen P, Tolonen U, Lopponen H, Lopponen T, Luotonen J, 
Jokinen K. Snoring children: factors predicting sleep apnea. Acta 
Otolaryngol [Suppl] (Stockh) 1997;529:190–194. 
32. Wang RC, Elkins TP, Keech D, Wauquier A, Hubbard D. Accuracy 
of clinical evaluation in pediatric obstructive sleep apnea. 
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998;118:69–73. 
33. Guilleminault C, Winkle R, Korobkin R, Simmons B. Children 
and nocturnal snoring: Evaluation of the effects of sleep related 
respiratory resistive load and daytime functioning. Eur J Pediatr 
1982;139:165–171. 
34. Guilleminault C, Pelayo R, Leger D, Clerk A, Bocian RC. Recognition 
of sleep-disordered breathing in children. Pediatrics 
1996;98:871–882. 
35. Downey R III, Perkin RM, MacQuarrie J. Upper airway resistance 
syndrome: sick, symptomatic but underrecognized. Sleep 1993; 
16:620–623. 

