Ann Olul Rhiiiol Uryngol 113:2004 

INDICATIONS AND OUTCOMES OF ADENOIDECTOMY IN INFANCY 

ANAT SHATZ, MD 

JERUSALEM. ISRAEL 

Adenoid hypertrophy is otie of the most common causes of pediatric obstructive sleep apnea. Although adenoidectomy is the 
only effective treatment for adenoid hypertrophy, it is rarely perfonned in infants less than 1 year old. This study reports on the 
.successful use of adenoidectomy in 24 infants less than I year old with a triad of upper airway obstruction symptoms, findings of 
obstructing adenoids, and obstructive sleep apnea (but no other anomalies). This is a retrospective case series reviewing each infant's 
clinical data, including presenting symptoms (with special emphasis on apnea episodes), physical examination iindings. and results 
of other inve.stigations such as polysomnography. endoscopy. pH-metry. and echocardiography. With careful preoperative and postoperative 
monitoring, the 24 infants underwent adenoidectomy without cotnplications. After the procedure, all showed marked 
improvenieni wiih complete disappearance of sytnptoms of upper airway obstruction, failure to thrive, and gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. Adenoidectomy was found to be sulllcient and curative for such infants. 

KEY WORDS — adenoid hypertrophy, adenoidectomy, obstructive sleep apnea. upper airway obstruction. 

INTRODUCTION 
Adenoid hypertrophy is one of the most common 
causes of nasal obstruction leading to pediatric respiratory 
distress and is an important cause of obstructive 
sleep apnea {OS A) in infants and children.'-The 
contribution of adenoid hypertrophy to upper airway 
ob.struction (UAO) is even more significant in the 
presence of other structural factors that compromise 
the upper airways, eg. craniofacial anomalies.' Obstructive 
sleep apnea is a frequent, albeit underdiagnosed, 
condition in children and tiiay lead to substantial 
morbidity if left untreated. Its effects can iticlude 
failure to thrive (FTT). pulmonary hypertension, cor 
pultiionale. and neurocognitive problems that adversely 
affect future school performance."^*^ The OS A incidence 
rate reported for infants and children is approxitiiately 
0.69% to 2.9%.''-" In childhood. OSA is related 
to adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and in infancy, 
it is usually related to craniofacial anomalies.' The 
portion of these cases solely attributable to adenoid 
hypertrophy has not been reported in the literature. 

It is generally accepted that adenoid hypertrophy 
occurs mostly between 2 and 5 years of age'-" and 
is rarely found in infants !ess than 1 year old. However, 
an analysis of incidence by age group has not 
yet been reported in the literature. Although adenoidectomy 
is the only effective treatment for adenoid 
hypertrophy, it is rarely perfortned in infants less than 
1 year old. This study reports on the successful use 
of adenoidectomy in infants less than I year old with 
the triad of UAO sytnptoms. findings of obstructing 
adenoids, and OSA (but no other anomalies). It provides 
an indication that OSA appears more frequently 

in infants less than year old than previously suspected. 


MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The study group consisted of 24 infants who met 
3 criteria: I) UAO symptoms including snoring, respiralory 
distress, and/or apnea; 2) physical findings 
consistent with adenoid enlargement causing >50% 
narrowing of the nasopharynx; and 3) polysomnography 
demonstrating OSA. 

All infants less than I year of age who underwent 
adenoidectomy at the pediatric airway service of 
Shaare Zedek Medical Center. Jerusaletii. between 
1997 and 2001 were included in the study. These were 
otherwise healthy infants. (Five infants less than 1 
year old with craniofacial anomalies were excluded 
from this study.) 

Each infant's clinical data were recorded. Failure 
to thrive was defined as weight and height under the 
third percentile. All infants underwent a standard evaluation 
consisting of polysomnography. transnasal cndo.
scopy, 24-hour pH monitoring, and lateral neck 
radiography. These preoperative investigations are 
detailed below. 

Polysomnography was performed with a 12-channet 
polygraph in cases of suspected apnea. Flow was 
detected with a thermistor, and respiratory effort was 
detected with a Respitrace (Resp-Ez-Piezo electric 
crystal respiratory effort belt). Electroencephalograpby. 
electro-ophthalmography. electrocardiography, 
and electromyography were performed, and oxygen 
saturation and end tidal CO2 were recorded. We de-

From the Pcdiaiiii, \u\\..\\^ Service. Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, and the Dcpanmcm i>rotorhinolaryngology. Faculty of Health 
Sciences. Ben Gunuii Lrii\crsity, Beer Sheva. Israel. 
CORRESPONDENCE — Anat Shat/. MD. Pediatric Airways Service. Shaare Zedek Medical Center. Jerusalem 91031, Israel. 


Shalz. Adenohivvlniny in Infancy 

Fig I. l'i-ci|iiciiLy (lighl bar.s) and percentage (dark bars) 
olsyiiiploins. 

fined OSA as an apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) of 
>l/h. according to diagnostic guidelines proposed 
by the American Thoracic Society.'-^ 

Endoscopic examinations were performed with 
the patient in the supine position and a 2.2-mm or 
3.6-inm flexible fiberoptic endoscope introduced 
through the nasal caviiy. Dynamics of the oropharynx. 
hypopharynx. and larynx were as.sessed while 
the infant was under light sedation (midazolam 0.1 
ing/kg body weight, fcntanyl citrate I to 2 fxg/kg. or 
propotol 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg) and breathing spontaneously. 
We assessed the dynamic events while the 
infant was awakening. The pnicedure was video recorded 
so that endoscopic findings could be reassessed. 


We performed 24-hour midesophageal pH monitoring. 
Pathological pH findings were defined as a 
pH ot"<4 lor longer than 5 minutes and a total Boix-
Ochoa score of > 11.99.'^ A barium swallow esophagram 
was obtained in 11 cases of gastroesophageal 
refiux (in addition to pH monitoring). The criteria 
for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) included 
abnormal pH monitoring results and/or gastroesophageal 
retlux demonstrated on the barium 
esophagram. 

Standard lateral neck radiographs were used to 
confirm nasopharyngeal obstruction by the adenoids. 
The severity of adenoid hypertrophy was graded as 
follows: grade 1 was KX)9f^ (complete) obslruclion; 
grade 2 was 70% to 99% narrowing of the nasopha


25 

20 

IS 

10 

5 

2*1 

S5! 

ryngeal airways; and grade 3 was 50% to 69% narrowing. 


We perfonned echocardiography in 17 cases of 
severeOSA{AHIof>10). All infants underwent adenoideclomy 
by cureitage and were monitored overnight 
in a pediatric intensive care unit. 

RESULTS 

The infants' ages ranged from 5 to 12 months, with 
a mean of 10 months. There were 18 boys and (i girls. 
The length of Ib! low-up ranged from 4 to 18 months, 
with a mean of 12 months (median. 11.5 months). 
The most common presenting symptoms were apnea 
(91.6%) and noisy breathing, usually snoring 
(95.8%; Fig 1). On physical examination, the four 
most frequent findings were oral breathing, rhiiutis, 
chest and suprastcrnal retractions, and FTT (91.6%, 
83.3%, 79%, and 79%, respectively. Fig 2). Lateral 
neck radiographs revealed 2 cases of grade I adenoid 
hypertrophy. 9 grade 2 cases, and 13 grade 3 cases. 
On endoscopy. 3 infants exhibited pharyngea! wall 
collapse in addition to adenoid hypertrophy. The prcoperative 
basal O: saturation level ranged between 
82% and 89%. and the postoperative levels increased 
to 92% to 96% in room air conditions. The mean 
saturation (±SD) was 94.4% ± 4.6%. 

The preoperative echocardiography findings were 
normal for all 17 infants wh*.) were examined. There 
were no intraoperativc, immediate, or late postoperative 
complications, including bleeding or late nasopharyngeal 
stenosis. All infants demonstrated significant 
improvement in terms of ihe AHL The mean 
preoperative AHI for all infants was 16.72 ± 15.78 
(range. 1.7 to 57). For the 15 infants who underwent 
repeated polysomnography. the preoperaiive mean 
AHI was 19.57 ± 19.28 (range, 1.7 to 57) atid ihe 
po.stoperative mean AHI was 0.99 ± 0.64 (range, 0.3 
to 2.5; p = .001)9). There was no correlation between 
preoperative AH! and the severity grade of adenoid 
hypertrophy on lateral neck radiographs (r = -0.48. 
p = .99). 

After adenoidectomy. all 24 infants showed niurkod 
clinical improvement. Chest retractions, as well as 

Fig 2. Frequency of associated findings 


Shatz, Adeuoidectotm in liifaruy 

thoracoahdominyl asynchrony. completely disap-locations of the obstruction-" and determine whether 
peared. Dramatic improvement was also noted in the there are mulliplc synchronous obstructions that re3 
infants who exhibited pharyngeai wall collapse. quire treatment (Shatz et al, unpublished observa-
One month after the operation, none of the 24 in-tions, 2002). 

fants required medical antireflux treatment, whereas 
before the operation, 87.59! had GERD diagnosed 
by pH monitoring and were medicated for reflux. 
The preoperahve data indicated that 79% of the 24 
infants demonstrated FTF. One month after the operation, 
this rate dropped to 37.5%. Treatment ofOSA 
by adenoidectomy led to resolution of the somatic 
growth disturbance, and weight gain was observed 
in all infants. 

DISCUSSION 

The incidence rates of OSA and UAO (even withoul 
complete apnea) from adeiiolonsiliar hypertrophy 
appear to be rising, reHecting either an increasing 
number of cases or more accurate, and thus more 
frequent, diagnosis. This is especially true for infants. 
Before this study. 1 did not expect to find adenoid 
hypertrophy as a cause for UAO in infants less than 

I ycarot'agc. My view has now changed. Fiven m(.)derate 
adenoid hypertrophy in infants can cause OSA. 
I therefore make more extensive use of polysomnography 
and endoscopy in diagnosing UAO in such infants. 
In infants less than I year of age who exhibit 
significant narrowing of (he nasopharynx and OSA, 
adenoidectomy does not need to be accompanied by 
tonsilleetomy when adenoid hypertrophy is the only 
abnormal finding (ie, no tonsil enlargement and no 
craniofacial anomalies). In these circumstances, adenoidectomy 
alone was found to be a curative treatment 
following which OSA either disappeared or improved 
significantly. Tonsilleetomy is indicated only 
in the rare cases of infants with obstructing or "kissing" 
tonsils. For infants with OSA, I recommend individual 
consideration of each case, rather than automatic 
referral for tonsilleetomy and adenoideetomy 
as advocated by 

This study found no correlation between the severity 
grading of adenoid hypertrophy and the severity 
of UAO and OSA. Polysomnography, on the other 
band, can define the severity of OSA. It is particularly 
important in the diagnosis of OSA in infants, 
given that the decision to perform or forgo a surgical 
procedure involves high levels of risk in the first 12 
months of life. Polysomnography indicates the significance 
of the clinical problem and serves as a tool 
to follow up and measure the effectiveness of treatment. 


Endoscopic evaluations are the key tools in investigating 
the causes of OSA. Endoscopy provides an 
accurate diagnosisof nasopharyngeal obstruction, becaLise 
direct visualization can establish the nature and 

Gastroesophageal refiux disease is commonly associated 
with UAO. Fk'fore the operation. 87.5% of 
infants in this study had GERD. In other reports, 88% 
of similar infants (ie, infants less than 1 year old. 
with UAO. who underwent adenoidectomy), but only 
32% of those older than I year, had a diagnosis of 
GERD.-' Gastroesophageal refiux disease generally 
resolves itself after 12 months ol' age, with gradual 
improvement seen over a period of several months. 
Treatment of UAO by adenoidectomy seemed to facilitate 
complete resolution of refiux in the infants 
in this study. They became free of symptoms within 
the first month following surgery, and medication was 
discontinued. This outcome suggests that UAO may 
play a dominant factor in the pathogenesis or aggravation 
of GERD in infants younger than I year of 
age. 

Failure to thrive is a common complication of childhood 
OSA. Therefore, OSA should be considered in 
the difierential diagnosis of FTT in children and infants.---^ 
The high incidence of FTT in this study 
suggests a more pronounced effect of UAO on infants 
in comparison to older children. According to 
Marcus et aL-~' FTT could be a by-product of the 
higher caloric expenditure caused by the increased 
effort required to breathe during sleep. This effect 
may explain the rapid eateh-up in growth, and subsequent 
normal growth curves, following adenoidectomy 
in infants with adenoid hypertrophy and FTT. 
This study complements prior reports that infants 
with enlarged adenoids and OSA who are younger 
than 18 months, including infants with dysmorphism, 
demonstrate a significant increase in weight gain following 
adenotonsillectomy.^ 

In infants with severe OSA, preoperative assessment 
by echocardiography is indicated to reveal the 
presence of pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular 
dysfunction, which contribute to the risk of 
arrhythmias during anesthesia. Our experience indicates 
thai with careful preoperative monitoring, most 
complications can be prevented in infants with OSA. 

It is thought that there is a higher risk of surgical 
complications in children with very severe OSA or 
in children less than t year old. This was found to be 
true of infants with craniofacial disorders and severe 
refractory OSA.-"" However, this was not found to 
be true in this study of infants less than 1 year of age 
who had OSA but were otherwise healthy. After surgery, 
however, there is always a high ri.sk of UAO in 
an obtunded patient for whom the anesthetic effects 


Shaiz. Adenoldectomy in Infancy 

stil! compromise upper airway tone and reflexes.-^ 
The development of" idiopathic pulmonary edema 
following the relief of UAO also has been noted.-^ 
These risks ot postoperative complications seem to 
justify overnight cardiorcspiratory monitoring in an 
intensive care unit after adcnuidcctomy in inlanls. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The following conclusions can be drawn with respect 
to infants less than I year of age with UAO 
symptoms and findings of obstructing adenoids and 
OSA (but who are otherwise healthy). 

1. Obstructive sleep apnea appears more frequently 
than previous studies suggest, and adenoid hypertrophy 
.seems to be more prevalent ihan is commonly 
reported in the literature. Obstructive sleep apnea due 
to adenoid hypertrophy with obstruclion does occur 
in infants. Their young age should noi prevent adenoidectomy 
whenever the procedure is indicated. 

2. Adenoidectomy (without tonsillectomy) may 
be sufficient and curative for these infants. 
3. Both FTT and GERD markedly improve, and 
may resolve completely, after adenoidectomy. 
4. Polysomnography is the gold standard for the 
diagnosis of OSA and for measuring the effectiveness 
of treatment in infants. 
5. After adenoidectomy in infants, postoperative 
monitoring in the intensive care unit for 24 hours is 
highly recommended. 
REFERENCES 


1. Gtiilleniin;iull C. Korot>kin R. Winkle R. A review of 50 
children with nhsiructive sleep apnea syndrome. Lung 1981:159: 
275-87. 
2. Briiuitlettc RT. Fernbacli SK. Hunt CF.. Obstriiciive steep 
upnea in inlanis and children. J Pedi;ilr I9X:: l(H);.l 1-40. 
3. Ward SL. Marcus CL. Obstruclive sleep apnea in infants 
and younj; children. J Clin Ncurophysiol 1996:13:198-207. 
4. HuniCK. BroLjilleiicRT. Abniinnaliiiesorbreathingconirul 
and airway maintenance in infants and children as a cause 
ofcorpulmonale. Pediair Cardiol 1982:3:249-56. 
5. Ro.ss RD. Daniels SR. Lnggic JMH. Meyer RA. Ballard 
ET. Sleep iipnea-asstK-ialod hypertension iuid reversible left ventricular 
hypertrophy. J Pediair i9«7:l 11:253-5. 
6- Richards W, Ferdnian RM. Prolonged morbidiiy due to 
delays in the diagnosis and treatment of obstructive sleep apnea 
in children. Clin Pediair (Phila) 2OOt):39:103-8. 

7. Everett AD. Koch WC. Saulsbury FT. Failure to thrive 
due to obstructive sleep npnea. Ctin Pedlatr (Phila) 1987:26:902. 
8. Go/al D. Sieep-disordered breathing and .school performance 
in children. Pediatrics l99S;i02:616-20. 
9. GislasonT. Bcnediktsdoiiir B. Snoring, apneic episodes, 
and nocturnal hypuxeniia among children 6 monlhs to 6 years 
old. An epidemiologic study ot lower liniil of prevalence. Chest 
1995:107:963-6. 
10. Briinetii t,. Rana S, Lospalluti ML. et al, Prevalence of 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome in a cohort of 1.207 children 
of southern iialy. Chest 2(K)I:I20:1930-5. 
11. Anunla.seree W. Rtwkkapan K. Kuasirikul S. Thongsuksai 
P. Snoring and obstructive sleep apnea in Thai school-age children: 
prevalence and predisposing factors. Pediatr Pulmonol 
2001:32:222-7. 
12. Hui S. Wing YW. Obstruclive sleep apnoea syndrome In 
children. Hong Kong Med J !997;3:4l9-26. 
13. GaultierC. Sleep-related breathing disorders. 6. Obstructive 
steep apnoea syndrome in inlanis and children: established 
facts and unsettled issues. Thorax 1995:50:1204-10. 
14. American Thoracic Society. Standards and indicalions 
for cardiopulmonary sleep studies in children. Am J RespirCrit 
CareMeU 19y6;l.*i3:866-78. 
15. Tota G. Gar/i A. Strambi M. et al. Prognostic aspects of 
esophageal pH-meiry in infants with reilux (in iialian|. Pediatr 
MedChir 1994:16:49-51. 
16. Darrow DH. Siemens C. Indications for tonsilleclomy 
and adenoideclomy Laryngoscope 2O()2;l I2(suppl inoi:(i-lt), 
17. Deutsch ES. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. Changing 
indications. Pediatr Clin North Am 1996:43:1319-38. 
18. Leiberman A. Tal A. Brania I. Sofer S. Obstructive sleep 
apnea in young infants. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngo! 1988; 16: 
39-44. 
19. Potslc WP. Shah UK. Nonsurgical and surgical management 
of infants and children wiili obstructive sleep apnea syndrotnc. 
Otolaryngo! Clin North Am 1998:31:969-77. 
20. Croft CB. Thomson HG. Samuels MP. Southall DP. Endoscopic 
evaluation and treatment of sleep-asstxiated upper airway 
obstruction in infants and young children. Clin Otolaryngol 
1990:15:209-16. 
21. Carr MM. Poje CP, Ehrig D. Brodsky LS. Incidence of 
reflux in young children undergoing adenoidectomy. t.aryngoscope 
2001:111:2170-2. 
22. Freezer NJ. Bucens IK. Robertson CF. Obstructive sleep 
apnoea presenting as failure to thrive in infancy. J Paediatr Child 
Health 1995:31:172-5. 
23. Schiftmann R. Faber J. Eidelman Al. Obstructive hypertrophic 
adenoids and tonsils as a cause of infantile failure to 
thrive: reversed by tonsillectomy and adenuidectoniy. Int J Pediatr 
Otorhinoiaryngol 1985:9:183-7. 
24. Marcus CL. Carroll Jt-. Kocnicr CB. Hanier A. l.ut/ J. 
LoughlinGM. t^terniinants of growth in children with the obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome. J Pediatr I994;125:556-62. 
25. Januszkiewic/ JS. Cohen SR. Burstein FD, Sitnms C. 
Age-related outcomes of sleep apnea surgery in infants and children. 
Ann Pla.st Surg ! 997:38:465-77. 
26. McColIcy SA. April MM. Carroll JL. Naclerio RM. 
LoLighlinGM. Respiratory compromise after adentitonsiltectoniy 
in children with obstructive sleep apnea. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 1992:118:940-3. 
27. Oudjhane K. Bowen A. Oh KS. Young LW. Pulmonary 
edema complicating upper airway obstruction in infants and 
children. Can Assoc Radiol J 1992:43:278-82. 

