ARTICLE ARTICLE 
Tonsilloplasty in Children with Obstructive Symptoms 


Charalambos E. Skoulakis, MD, Chariton E. Papadakis, MD, Andreas G. Manios, MD, 
Panagiotis D. Moshotzopoulos, MD, Evaggelos A. Theos, MD, and Dimitris E. Valagiannis, MD 

ABSTRACT 

Objective: Obstructive symptoms, caused by tonsillar hypertrophy, have been attracting increasing interest, and tonsillectomy is 
often performed as a result of this indication. This study was undertaken to investigate the effect of the different surgical techniques, 
tonsilloplasty and tonsillectomy, on clinical symptoms in children with obstructive symptoms owing to tonsillar hypertrophy. 

Methods: Thirty children, 3 to 12 years old, were included; 15 of them underwent tonsilloplasty and 15 tonsillectomy. 
Tonsilloplasty was performed with a knife or scissors, and the trauma was closed with two or three sutures. The tonsillar capsule and 
about 15 to 20% of tonsillar tissue remain as a barrier to prevent exposure of the pharyngeal muscles. All children were operated on 
under the same anesthesia and followed the same postoperative scheme for analgesia. 

Results: All of the children were cured of their breathing obstruction. In the tonsilloplasty group, the tonsillar remnants healed 
completely within 1 week. The postoperative pain recorded was significantly less than in the tonsillectomy group. No major side 
effects occurred. The mean time used for the surgery was the same, and no postoperative bleeding was seen in both groups. The 
intraoperative bleeding observed was small in both groups, although significantly smaller for the tonsilloplasty group. 

Conclusions: Tonsilloplasty is a less traumatic and much less painful surgical method, and children recover more quickly. The 
results with respect to breathing obstruction are almost the same for both methods at the 1-year follow-up. It seems to be the most 
suitable method for children with tonsillar hypertrophy and obstructive symptoms. 

SOMMAIRE 

Objectifs: Les symptoˆmes obstructifs cause´s par des amygdales hypertrophie´es, attirent un inte´reˆt croissant et deviennent de 
plus en plus l’indication des amygdalectomies. Cette e´tude a e´te´ entreprise dans le but d’investiguer l’effet de diffe´rentes techniques 
chirurgicales, spe´cifiquement l’amygdaloplastie et l’amygdalectomie, sur les symptoˆmes cliniques obstructifs dus aux amygdales 
hypertrophie´es chez l’enfant. 

Me´thodes: Trente enfants de 3 a` 12 ans ont e´te´ inclus; 15 ont subi une amygdaloplastie et 15 une amygdalectomie. La technique 
chirurgicale de l’amygdaloplastie implique une dissection au bistouri et aux ciseaux et le trauma referme´ avec 2 ou 3 sutures. La 
capsule amygdalienne et environ 15 a` 20% du tissue amygdalien demeure comme barrie`re pour pre´venir l’exposition des muscles 
pharynge´s. Tous les enfants ont e´te´ ope´re´s sous le meˆme genre d’anesthe´sie et la meˆme analge´sie post-ope´ratoire. 

Re´sultats: Tous les enfants sont gue´ris de leurs proble`mes d’obstruction. Dans le groupe d’amygdaloplastie, les vestiges 
gue´rissent comple`tement en une semaine. La douleur post-ope´ratoire rapporte´e est significativement moindre dans ce groupe que 
dans l’amygdalectomie. Nous n’avons note´ aucun effet secondaire majeur. La moyenne du temps ope´ratoire est la meˆme dans les 
deux groupes et aucun saignement post-ope´ratoire n’a e´te´ note´. Les saignements intra-ope´ratoires ont e´te´ faibles dans les deux 
groupes mais statistiquement moins e´leve´s dans le groupe d’amygdaloplastie. 

Conclusion: La technique chirurgicale d’amygdaloplastie est moins traumatique, beaucoup moins douloureuse et les enfants 
re´cupe`rent plus rapidement. Les re´sultats sur les proble`mes d’obstruction respiratoire en suivi apre`s un an sont pratiquement les 
meˆmes pour les deux techniques. Il semble que ce soit la technique la plus souhaitable pour les enfants avec une hypertrophie des 
amygdales et des symptoˆ mes d’obstruction. 

Key words: obstructive symptoms, partial tonsillectomy, tonsillar hypertrophy, tonsillectomy, tonsilloplasty, tonsillotomy. 

Received 11/16/05. Received revised 01/29/06. Accepted for publication 
01/31/06. 

Charalambos E. Skoulakis, Panagiotis D. Moshotzopoulos, Evaggelos 

A. Theos, and Dimitris E. Valagiannis: Otolaryngology Department, 
Address reprint requests to: Charalambos E. Skoulakis, MD, Dimitriados 

General Hospital of Volos, Volos, Greece; Chariton E. Papadakis: 

50, Volos 38333, Greece; e-mail: skulakis@hotmail.com; skulakis@ 

Otolaryngology Department, General Hospital of Chania, Chania, Crete, 

otenet.gr.

Greece; Andreas G. Manios: Department of Plastic Surgery, University 
Hospital of Crete, Heraklion, Crete. DOI 10.2310/7070.2007.0030 

The Journal of Otolaryngology, Vol 36, No 4 (August), 2007: pp 240–246 


Skoulakis et al, Tonsilloplasty in Children with Obstructive Symptoms 

T onsillectomy (TE) and adenoidectomy are considered 
the most common major surgical procedures in 
otolaryngology. Indications for TE are recurrent episodes 
of acute tonsillitis, peritonsillar abscesses, and upper 
airway obstruction caused by hyperplasia of the lymphoid 
tissue in Waldeyer’s ring.1 For many years, upper 
respiratory tract infections and rheumatic fever were the 
main indications for TE. During the last few decades, there 
has been a decline in the total number of TEs as recurrent 
tonsillitis is more often treated with antibiotics. At the 
same time, the relationship between intermittent upper 
airway obstruction during sleep and tonsillar hypertrophy 
has been attracting increasing attention. Several reports 
have shown that the majority of TEs in children are 

2

performed today as a result of this indication.

Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) has been well 
described in the literature. It affects both adults and 
children. The most common physical findings in children 
with symptoms of upper airway obstruction are enlarge


3

ment of the adenoid and tonsils.Today’s medicolegal 
climate is suggesting and often demanding documentation 
of obstructive sleep apnea in adults by polysomnography 
(PSG) for surgical treatment.3,4 In children, several tools 
are available for the definitive diagnosis of SDB. PSG is the 
gold standard but is time-consuming and expensive. PSG 
often has to be performed in tertiary care centres, with few 
clinicians capable of interpreting the results. The field of 
otolaryngology is in the forefront in developing clinometric 
tools to evaluate its procedures. Recent quality of 
life studies demonstrate short-term improvement in 
quality of life after adenotonsillar surgery.3,5 

The choice of the surgical technique is dictated by each 
patient’s individual clinical symptoms, as well as the 
surgeon’s experience and the prevalent theories and 
aspects of each time. Over recent years, the procedure is 
surrounded by controversy, especially regarding the details 
of the surgical technique, as well as the amount of tissue 
that must be removed (partial or total TE). With regard to 
adenoidectomy, it is generally accepted that the whole 
lymphoid tissue, which protrudes in the nasopharynx, 
must be removed, regardless of the reason for which this 
procedure was recommended (obstructive sleep apnea or 
recurrent infections). 

On the other hand, the necessity for total TE is 
surrounded by controversy, especially in patients who 
suffer from obstructive symptoms owing to enlarged 
tonsils, although they do not have a history of chronic 
or current tonsil infections. 

There are many references in the contemporary 
literature describing different techniques in tonsil reduc


tion. These techniques aim at reducing enlarged tonsils, 
resolving obstruction problems, and, at the same time, 
minimizing complications that result from total TE. 
Despite a range of different techniques, including blunt 

6 78

dissection, guillotine,diathermy,or laser,and the use of 
multiple analgesics, postoperative pain remains the major 
side effect of the operation. A prolonged period of 
postoperative recovery lasting up to 2 weeks is standard, 
and there is always the risk of bleeding.9,10 

The purpose of the present investigation is to describe 
in detail the new technique and usability of tonsilloplasty 
(TP) in children with obstructive symptoms owing 
to enlarged tonsils and to compare the effect of TP with 
TE. 

Materials and Methods 

Thirty children, 3 to 12 years old, were included in the 
study; 13 of them were girls and 17 were boys. All of them 
were on the waiting list for tonsillar surgery owing to 
adenotonsillar enlargement and upper airway obstruction. 
Inclusion criteria were any patient, regardless of age, sex, 
or underlying medical factors, who was clinically diagnosed 
with obstructive symptoms. To obtain the diagnosis 
of upper airway obstruction, patients had to have (1) a 
history of loud snoring noted by primary caregiver, with 
audiotape when reliability is questioned, and (2) tonsillar 
size of +3 or greater (filling . 
50% of the oropharynx). 
Patients who have had a witnessed apnea and tonsillar size 
of +3 or greater were diagnosed with obstructive sleep 
apnea. They all had a verified tonsillar hyperplasia, and 
none of them had had repeated streptococcal throat 
infections, although nine of them suffered from secretory 
otitis media. 

The present clinical study was approved by the ethics 
committee at our hospitals. The patients were randomized 
from the waiting list to the two surgical procedures: 15 of 
them to the TP group and 15 to the TE group. All of them 
underwent adenoidectomy and nine underwent tympanotomy 
(four from the TP group and five from the TE 
group). 

Surgical Technique 

Under general anesthesia, the patients of the first group 
(tonsilloplasty) are placed in the Rose position with a 
shoulder roll underneath. A mouth retractor is carefully 
inserted, opened, and suspended. The tonsil is grasped 
with a tonsil forceps and retracted medially. Two incisions 
are performed in the tonsillar tissue parallel to the front 


The Journal of Otolaryngology, Volume 36, Number 4, 2007 

AB C 

Figure 1. A, The tonsil before tonsilloplasty. B, The resected portion of the tonsil. C, The tonsil after tonsilloplasty. 

and back tonsillar arches 3 to 4 mm away from them, using 
scalpel no. 15. In this way, a great part of the tonsil (75– 
80% of the tonsilar tissue) is dissected (Figure 1, A and B, 
and Figure 2A). The remaining parts of the tonsillar tissue 
are sutured together in such a way that the two dissected 
sites are perfectly attached to each other. At this point, 
special care has to be taken so that the sutures are not 
placed into the muscle layers of the tonsillar arches. Two to 
three rapidly absorbable sutures are usually required 
(Figures 1C and 2B). 

In TP, the time needed for a new epithelium to be 
formed on the remaining surfaces is much shorter 
compared with TE as the two dissected sites are perfectly 
attached to each other, thus closing the wound by first 
intension. The tonsils are reduced up to 70 to 80% of their 
volume, and the closure of the trauma provides an 
accurate and total hemostasis (Figure 2C). 

The patients of the second group (TE) are placed in the 
same position as the first group, and after incision of the 
epithelium with a knife along the anterior tonsillar pillar, 
the tonsil was bluntly dissected outside the capsula until it 
was completely removed at the level of the tongue base. A 
suture between the pillars at the lower pole was most often 
used. 

At the same time, all of the children in each group had 
an adenoidectomy and nine of them had a tympanotomy 
using a conventional surgical technique. Four hours after 
surgery, the patients were capable of eating and could leave 
the hospital at the evening of the same day or the next 
morning. Minor analgesics were administered to children 
(acetaminophen 25 mg/kg) as needed postoperatively, and 
the children were encouraged to eat and drink when the 
effects of anesthesia had passed, usually after 3 to 4 hours. 
Postoperative pain was measured using 10-point visual 
analogue score questionnaires, with 1 equating to no pain 
and 10 equating to severe pain. All of the children attended 
a postoperative checkup in the office 4 to 5 and 10 to 15 
days after surgery. The postoperative pain, judged by the 
parents, had been surprisingly mild and easily controlled 
with the prescribed acetaminophen. The child and the 
parents brought the written report at the first postoperative 
checkup at the fourth to fifth day and also 
gave their opinion about the procedure orally (Figures 3 
and 4). 

At 6 months and 1 year after surgery, the parents were 
sent a questionnaire in which they reported on the child’s 
preoperative symptoms and how these had changed after 
surgery. Visual analogue scales were used. The question-


AB C 

Figure 2. Tonsilloplasty. A, Patient before the operation. B, Patient after the operation. C, Patient 1 year later. 


Skoulakis et al, Tonsilloplasty in Children with Obstructive Symptoms 


Figure 3. Visual analogue scale used in the pain measurements. 

naire asked about snoring, breathing stops, and eating 
problems, and there was also a more general question: 
‘‘Are you and your child satisfied with the result of the 
surgery?’’ (Figure 5). 

Statistical testing was performed with the nonparametric 
Mann-Whitney test; a p value , 
.05 was considered 
significant. 

Results 

Of the 30 children, 15 were operated on with TP and 15 
with TE. The ages and sexes were similar. Anesthesia was 
the same for both groups, and the mean time in the 
operating room was approximately the same for both 
groups. 

On average, the postoperative pain score was significantly 
lower (about 50%) for the TP group than for the TE 
group (p , 
.001). The children of the TP group were pain 
free 4 days earlier than the children with TE. Likewise, the 
TP group returned to a normal diet 4 days before the TE 

group. Thus, the time needed for a return to a normal 
eating routine was significantly less for the TP group (p , 
.001). 

At the first postoperative visit (fourth to fifth postoperative 
days), all of the children of the TP group were 
completely healed and fully epithelialized, without any sign 
of wound, swelling, or infection. On the other hand, the 
children of the TE group at the second visit (eighth to 
tenth postoperative days) had little sign of inflammation, 
with white eschar and red pillars and some edema of the 
area. 

The intraoperative bleeding observed in the present 
study was small in both groups, although it was 
significantly smaller for the TP group. No postoperative 
bleeding was noted in both groups, although, according to 
the literature, there is a small but alarming risk of bleeding 
7 to 10 days after TE. The TP technique achieved very 
good hemostasis during surgery, without the risk of 
postoperative bleeding owing to the sutured remaining 
parts of the tonsillar tissue. 


The Journal of Otolaryngology, Volume 36, Number 4, 2007 


Figure 4. Time of eating without difficulties. 

The snoring symptoms were completely relieved 
immediately after surgery in all of the children of both 
groups. One year postoperatively, three children in the TP 
group and two children in the TE group started to snore 
periodically. During their follow-up, one child in the TP 
group and one child in the TE group were found to have 
allergic rhinitis and the other three children were heavily 
overweight. The difference between the TP and TE groups 
is not significant (p 5 
.63). 

Discussion 

Many terms are used to describe tonsil surgery. 
Tonsillectomy is defined as the removal of the entire tonsil 
and is derived from the Latin word tonsilla, which means a 
stake to which boats are tied, and the Greek word ectomy, 

11

which means excision.Tonsillotomy is derived from the 
Latin word tonsilla and the Greek word tome, which means 

incision on the tonsillar tissue. Tonsilloplasty is derived 
from the Latin word tonsilla and the Greek word –plasty, 
which means removal of the excess tissue and reconstruction 
in the normal size and shape. 

In proportion, TE is the surgical procedure in which 
the tonsillar tissue is completely removed by anatomic 
dissection. In that way, the constrictor pharyngeal muscle 
is exposed and the surgical field or wound is left to 
secondary healing. Secondary healing involves no formal 
wound closure; the wound closes spontaneously by 
contraction and reepithelialization of the pharyngeal 
musculature. In tonsillotomy, the surgeon achieves partial 

10

removal of the tonsillar tissue.The pharyngeal constrictor 
muscle in that case is protected by the tonsillar 
tissue that remains in the tonsillar fossa. However, the 
lymphoid tissue is left to heal by second intension without 
the protection of the epithelium, the formation of which is 
expected after 10 days. 


Skoulakis et al, Tonsilloplasty in Children with Obstructive Symptoms 


Figure 5. Snoring frequency after 1 year. 

In TP, the surgeon removes the tissue in excess and 
reconstructs the original shape of the tonsil by suturing the 

12

tonsillar remnants.In that way, instant restoration of the 
epithelium is achieved (primary healing of the wound), as 
well as a significant reduction in the size of the tonsils. In 
addition, the sutures induce the retraction of the tonsillar 
pillars and, in that way, the increase in free space in the 
oropharynx. 

During the decade of the 1940s, a total tonsillectomy 
technique was developed following improvement in 
anesthesia protocols. According to this technique, the 
entire tonsil’s tissue would be removed, leaving the 
constrictor muscle of the pharynx exposed. In the years 
to follow, this technique found widespread application 
with some modifications. The persistency of surgeons at 
that time on performing total tonsillectomy was justified 
since tonsil infections and their serious complications were 
a major problem owing to the lack of antibiotics. 

In recent years, common problems of the tonsils can be 
controlled, and quite often an operation is recommended 
only because of the obstructive symptoms of enlarged 
tonsils. A new surgical technique for tonsillar surgery has 
developed: the partial removal of the tonsils.1,2,9,13–15 

In the present study, we performed TP to resolve 
obstruction caused by hypertrophied tonsils. This technique 
has the same intention as the tonsillotomy or partial 

15

TE.That method still has its proponents. However, the 
results with respect to surgical risks are quite different: the 
tonsillotomy was abandoned because of the risk of major 
bleeding and the risk of scarring, which could later cause 
the problem of peritonsillitis.14,15 In the present study, the 
sutures accomplished a good hemostasis during the 
surgery in all cases. The tonsillar remnants healed without 
any visible scarring within the first 4 to 5 days and the 
obstructive symptoms vanished. All of the children had 
less postoperative pain than expected after a conventional 
TE (see Figure 5). 

TP has not been previously described in the literature. In 
this study, TP has been proved to be significantly less painful, 
with more rapid healing of the tonsillar fossae. The reduction 
in postoperative pain was noticeable within the first few 
hours in children lying still, with minimal crying, compared 
with children who had undergone routine dissection TE. The 
most important complication of TE is the bleeding, whereas 
the TP technique achieves very good hemostasis during 
surgery, and there is minimal risk of postoperative bleeding. 


The Journal of Otolaryngology, Volume 36, Number 4, 2007 

The method we propose in this study leaves no exposed 
surfaces and therefore ensures that the healing of the trauma 
will be completed within hours. 

Conclusions 

The present study showed that TP is a valid option for 
surgery on hypertrophied tonsils and indicated that it 
might have a favourable postoperative course with less 
postoperative pain. The procedure also appears to be 
suitable for 1-day surgery. 

References 

1. 
Temple RH, Timms MS. Paediatric coblation tonsillectomy. Int J 
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2001;61:195–8. 
2. 
Densert O, Desai H, Eliasson A, et al. Tonsillotomy in children 
with tonsillar hypertrophy. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 2001;121: 
854–8. 
3. 
Flanary VA. Long-term effect of adenotonsillectomy on quality of 
life in pediatric patients. Laryngoscope 2003;113:1639–44. 
4. 
Goh YH, Choy DK. Omission of polysomnography in treatment of 
snoring: common reasons and medico-legal implications. J 
Laryngol Otol 2000;114:519–21. 
5. 
Goldstein NA, Sculerati N, Walsleben JA, et al. Clinical diagnosis of 
pediatric obstructive sleep apnea validated by polysomnography. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1994;111:611–7. 
6. 
Yuan CC, Yu DY, Jun TS. Guillotine tonsillectomy without 
anaesthesia. Auris Nasus Larynx 1984;11:29–35. 
7. 
Goycoolea MV, Cubillod PM, Martinez GC. Tonsillectomy with a 
suction coagulator. Laryngoscope 1982;92:818–9. 
8. 
Martinez SA, Akin DP. Laser tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. 
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1987;20:371–6. 
9. 
Hultcrantz E, Linder A, Markstrom A. Tonsillectomy or 
tonsillotomy? A randomized study comparing postoperative pain 
and long-term effects. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1999;51: 
171–6. 
10. 
Koltai PJ, Solares CA, Koempel JA, et al. Intracapsular tonsillar 
reduction (partial tonsillectomy): reviving a historical procedure 
for obstructive sleep disordered breathing in children. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2003;129:532–8. 
11. 
Koempel JA. On the origin of tonsillectomy and the dissection 
method. Laryngoscope 2002;112:1583–6. 
12. 
Koltai PJ, Solares CA, Mascha EJ, Xu M. Intracapsular partial 
tonsillectomy for tonsillar hypertrophy in children. Laryngoscope 
2002;112Suppl 100:17–9. 
13. 
Linder A, Markstrom A, Hultcrantz E. Using the carbon dioxide 
laser for tonsillotomy in children. Int J Pediatr Otolaryngol 1999; 
50:31–6. 
14. 
Arya A, Donne AJ, Nigam A. Double-blind randomized controlled 
study of coblation tonsillotomy versus coblation tonsillectomy on 
postoperative pain. Clin Otolaryngol 2003;28:503–6. 
15. 
Hultcrantz E, Linder A, Markstrom A. Long-term effects of 
intracapsular partial tonsillectomy (tonsillotomy) compared with 
full tonsillectomy. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 2005;69:463–9. 

