BEHAVIORAL SLEEP MEDICINE, 5:147–175, 2007 
Copyright © Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
ISSN: 1540-2002 print/1540-2010 online 
DOI: 10.108/15402000701190671 

Behavioral Training for Increasing 
Preschool Children’s Adherence 
With Positive Airway Pressure: 
A Preliminary Study 


Keith J. Slifer 

Department of Behavioral Psychology 
Kennedy Krieger Institute, and 
Departments of Psychiatry and Pediatrics 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 


Deborah Kruglak, Ethan Benore, Kimberly Bellipanni, 
and Lori Falk 

Department of Behavioral Psychology 
Kennedy Krieger Institute, and 
Department of Pediatrics 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 


Ann C. Halbower 

Department of Pediatrics 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 


Adrianna Amari and Melissa Beck 

Department of Behavioral Psychology 
Kennedy Krieger Institute, and 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 


Correspondence should be addressed to Keith J. Slifer, Department of Behavioral Psychology, 
Kennedy Krieger Institute, 707 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205. E-mail: Slifer@ 
Kennedykrieger.org 


148 SLIFER ET AL. 

Behavioral training was implemented to increase adherence with positive airway 
pressure (PAP) in 4 preschool children. The training employed distraction, counter-
conditioning, graduated exposure, differential reinforcement, and escape extinction. 
A non-concurrent multiple baseline experimental design was used to demonstrate 
program effects. Initially, the children displayed distress and escape–avoidance 
behavior when PAP was attempted. With training, all 4 children tolerated PAP 
while sleeping for age appropriate durations. For the 3 children with home follow-
up data, the parents maintained benefits. The results are discussed in relation to 
behavior principles, child health, and common barriers to PAP adherence. 

Breathing disorders such as hypoventilation, hypercarbia, obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA), and central apnea are more likely to occur in children with developmental 
disabilities. High-risk groups include children with adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy, obesity, craniofacial anomalies, muscular dystrophy, cerebral palsy, 
and some types of genetic disorders (e.g., Down syndrome, Prader–Willi syndrome, 
etc.) (Carroll, 2003; Jeans, Fernando, Maw, & Leighton, 1981). Breathing 
problems threaten children’s health, disturb their sleep, and may lead to or 
exacerbate daytime behavior problems. They also may contribute to neurocognitive 
impairment and diminished academic performance (American Academy 
of Pediatrics, 2002; American Thoracic Society, 1996; Blunden, Lushington, 
& Kennedy, 2001; Gozal, 1998; Halbower & Mahone, 2006). If left untreated, 
breathing disorders can result in life-threatening complications such as cor pulmonale 
(hypertrophy of the right ventricle of the heart) or failure to thrive. 

OSA is estimated to occur in 1% to 3% of preschool children and is thought 
to occur equally among boys and girls (American Thoracic Society, 1996). OSA 
can be seen from the neonatal period forward, but the peak prevalence is thought 
to be between 2 and 6 years of age when the tonsils and adenoids are the largest 
in relation to the underlying airway size (Jeans et al., 1981). Adenotonsillectomy 
is the first line of treatment for most children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy; 
however, some children continue to experience symptoms after surgery (Lipton 
& Gozal, 2003). For the children who do not respond to surgery or those who 
are not candidates for the surgery (e.g., those who have other predisposing 
factors for OSA, those with hypoventilation due to lung disease, and those with 
central hypoventilation), alternative treatments are required. The most frequently 
recommended alternative treatment option is positive airway pressure (PAP) 
therapy (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2002). PAP has been demonstrated 
to be a safe and effective option for children with OSA or other breathing 
disorders (Marcus et al., 1995). 

There are two major types of PAP devices: continuous PAP (CPAP) and bilevel 
PAP. CPAP is the continuous delivery of air at constant pressure during 
both inhalation and exhalation. Bi-level PAP differs from CPAP in that the 
pressure during exhalation may be set lower than the pressure during inhalation. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 149 

Bi-level PAP decreases the work of inhalation without requiring more work 
during exhalation. Both CPAP and bi-level PAP are effective treatments for 
OSA (Marcus et al., 2006). However, CPAP is most commonly used to treat 
OSA, and bi-level PAP is used to help ventilate children with hypoventilation 
(e.g., due to low lung volumes) or central hypoventilation (e.g., children with 
brain tumors or Prader–Willi syndrome). Bi-level PAP is used for patients with 
OSA if it makes them more comfortable than CPAP. 

For either type of PAP to be effective, the patient must breathe through a 
snug-fitting mask during the hours of sleep. This can be particularly difficult for 
children with developmental disabilities and for those with anxiety or behavioral 
problems (Koontz, Slifer, Cataldo, & Marcus, 2003). These children often 
verbally and physically resist attempts to put on the mask (e.g., head turns, and 
using hands to cover face or push away the mask). They also may develop conditioned 
anxiety because the sight, sound, and sensation of PAP are associated 
with discomfort from the mask, or physiologic arousal from struggling, or both 
(Koontz et al., 2003). A 1995 study examining the safety and efficacy of CPAP 
with children found that when CPAP was not effective, it was because of poor 
adherence in 92% of unsuccessful cases (Marcus et al., 1995). 

Previous studies have demonstrated the utility of behavior analysis and therapy 
for increasing child adherence and coping with painful or uncomfortable 
medical procedures such as gynecological exams (Dahlquist, Gil, Kalfus, Blount, 
& Boyd, 1984), tracheostomy suctioning and care (DeRowe, Fishman, Leor, & 
Kornecki, 2003; Derrickson, Neef, & Parrish, 1991; Slifer, Babbitt, & Cataldo, 
1995), self-catheterization (McComas, Lalli, & Benavides, 1999; Neef, Parrish, 
Hannigan, Page, & Iwata, 1989), neuroimaging (Slifer, Cataldo, Cataldo, 
Llorente, & Gerson, 1993; Slifer, Koontz, & Cataldo, 2002), radiation therapy 
(Hawkins, 1991; Slifer, 1996; Slifer, Bucholtz, & Cataldo, 1994), and needle 
sticks (Dahlquist, 1992; Slifer et al., 1995; Slifer, Eischen, & Busby, 2002; 
Slifer, Eischen, Tucker, et al., 2002; Slifer, Tucker, & Dahlquist, 2002). 

Only one study has demonstrated behavioral methods for increasing children’s 
adherence with PAP therapy (Koontz et al., 2003). The clinical outcome 
data from that study supported the utility of behavior analysis and therapy for 
improving PAP adherence, thereby facilitating effective clinical management of 
OSA (Koontz et al., 2003). Although Koontz et al. included some children with 
developmental disabilities, the children who achieved the greatest increases in 
mean hours per night of PAP adherence (e.g., >5.0 hr per night) were those reported 
to have higher levels of estimated cognitive functioning. In only one case 
was a mean increase in adherence of greater than 5 hr per night achieved by a 
child with mental retardation. For the one other child with mild mental retardation 
and the three children with moderate to severe mental retardation, the mean 
increase in hours of adherence per day ranged from 4.0 to 5.0. The Koontz et al. 
study also was based on a non-experimental analysis of retrospective clinic data. 


150 SLIFER ET AL. 

The purpose of this study was to employ repeated measures and single-
participant experimental methods to evaluate prospectively the effects of a multi-
component behavior therapy protocol on the PAP adherence of 4 preschool age 
children with developmental problems, serious health impairments, and pronounced 
behavioral distress in response to PAP. 

The dependent measures for the study were (a) the percentage of steps in the 
PAP task-analysis that were completed during each observed PAP administration, 
and (b) PAP adherence defined as the number of hours per day that the PAP 
equipment was worn by the child. It was hypothesized that the implementation 
of the behavior therapy protocol would significantly increase both the percentage 
of steps completed and the number of hours per day of PAP for all 4 targeted 
children. 

The 4 children were selected because their behavioral distress and attempts 
to escape the PAP mask and equipment were especially challenging. These were 
children who were referred because of their severe behavioral reaction to the 
PAP mask and airflow during initial attempts to conduct polysomnography or to 
initiate PAP therapy. The techniques comprising the behavior therapy protocol 
included (a) conducting a task analysis of the regimen; (b) providing distraction 
from uncomfortable sensations using preferred activities; (c) counterconditioning 
emotional arousal by providing preferred activities to induce a relaxed, positive 
state; (d) maintaining the child’s positive state while gradually exposing him or 
her to the steps in the task analysis and the associated sensations; (e) differential 
reinforcement of partial adherence by providing contingent praise and positive 
events (mask removal by the therapist after a given interval of child adherence, 
provision of preferred activities, or prizes); and (f) placing escape–avoidance behavior 
on extinction (by interrupting, blocking, or redirecting these behaviors). 
This “package” of procedures is similar to those described by Koontz et al. 
(2003). The 4 children in this study were young (M 
age = 
3.1 years, range = 
3.25–5.25 years), had developmental delays, and had serious health impairments 
(e.g., obesity, cor pumale, diabetes, reactive airway disease, lung hypoplasia, status 
post craniopharyngioma resection). In all 4 cases initial clinical observation 
indicated that the children did not consistently comply with parental instructions. 
Three of the 4 children had been admitted to a rehabilitation hospital for medical 
and behavioral intervention, and the fourth had in-home nursing services 
to assist with his medical monitoring and care. Only 1 of the children in the 
Koontz et al. study was as medically compromised (a 3-year-old with chronic 
heart and lung failure). PAP adherence was not successfully increased for that 
child because the family did not employ the procedures recommended and did 
not return for behavior therapy services. The child was listed as deceased in the 
Koontz et al. report. 

Thus, the purpose of this study was to acquire additional information on 
the benefits and limitations of behavior therapy for improving PAP adherence 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 151 

in young, developmentally delayed, and significantly health-impaired children; 
thereby potentially supplementing the results previously published by Koontz 
et al. (2003). We present the behavioral conceptualization, case histories, and 
procedural details for these 4 challenging cases to offer to other practitioners 
information that might help them successfully address the PAP adherence 
of their young patients with similar developmental, medical, and behavioral 
characteristics. 

METHOD 

Participants 

Four children participated in behavioral training to increase adherence with bilevel 
PAP therapy. Three of the participants were treated during an inpatient 
rehabilitation stay in an urban pediatric hospital for children with disabilities. 
The fourth (Ernie) was treated on an outpatient basis at the same hospital. Table 1 
provides detailed demographic and medical variable data for the 4 children and 
their families. 

Indigo is a 5-year and 3-month-old African American girl who is diagnosed 
with central hypoventilation, narcolepsy, diabetes, visual impairment, memory 
impairment, and labile affect following surgical resection of a craniopharyngioma. 
Her central hypoventilation had been discovered during her recovery 
after her surgery. One polysomnography was attempted, but was unsuccessful, 
prior to the initiation of behavioral training for bi-level PAP adherence. During 
the first two nights of her inpatient stay, nursing staff had presented the 
PAP mask and prompted Indigo verbally and manually in an attempt to put the 
mask in place. Usual nursing care to praise cooperative behavior was provided, 
but no systematic reinforcement contingency was in effect. Indigo verbally and 
physically refused the bi-level PAP mask with crying, distress vocalizations, 
and attempts to block or hit care providers (or both). Her visual impairment, 
abnormal sleep pattern, developmental status, anticipatory anxiety, and the uncomfortable 
nature of multiple daily demands (e.g., finger sticks, wheelchair 
transfers, and physical therapy) appeared to contribute to Indigo’s anticipatory 
anxiety, behavioral variability, and nonadherence. 

Buzz is a 3-year and 3-month-old morbidly obese African American boy with 
reactive airway disease, obesity, and borderline insulin resistance. He presented 
with snoring, paradoxical breathing patterns, restlessness, sleep arousals, nasal 
congestion, abnormal sleep position, sweating, reflux, drooling, and enuresis. He 
underwent one polysomnography evaluation prior to the initiation of behavior 
therapy for bi-level PAP adherence. Sufficient data were obtained to diagnose 
his breathing problems and to prescribe bi-level PAP. He was admitted to inpatient 
rehabilitation for adherence training for bi-level PAP and weight reduction. 


TABLE 1Child and Family Demographic and Medical Data

PSG on Room Air

Primary

with no PAP With PAP 

BodyPrimaryCaregivingNo. ofAgeWeightPAPCaregivingParent’sOtherNo. of(Years–Kg/PercentileSettingsPETCO2Parent’sYears ofChildrenParentsIncomeChild Month) Race Sex Diagnoses for Age AHI LowSaO2 PETCO2 (cm H2O) AHI LowSaO2 (mmHg) Age Education in Home in Home Level 

Indigo 5–3 AA Girl S/p craniopharyngioma35.9/97th 11.3 71% 61 12/6 0.1 87 65 28 16 One Two Moderate 

resection, central

hypoventilation;

narcolepsy, diabetes,

visual and memory

problems 
Buzz 3–3 AA Boy Obesity, OSA, RAD,47.4/99th 13.3 71% 64 8/6 4 80 58 28 <12 Two One Low 

borderline insulin

resistance 
Trevor 3–5 AA Boy Prader–Willi syndrome,36.8/99th Severe OSAa 82% 60 20/10 0.4 88 60 35 12 Four Two Low 

OSA, cor pulmonale,

DD 
Ernie 3–3 C Boy Renal agenesis, lung12.3/5th Hypo-86% 73 12/4 0.0 93 63 40 12 One Two Moderate 

hypoplasia,ventilation

hypoventilation:0.0 

hypercarbia, vertebral

anomalies, scoliosis,

failure to thrive,

language delay 

Note.AA 
= 
African American; AHI 
= 
apnea–hypopnea index; C 
= 
Caucasian; cm H2O 
= 
centimeters of water; Low SaO2 
= 
lowest oxygen saturation during PSG; PETCO2 
= 
end-tidal carbon dioxide pressure;
mmHg 
= 
millimeters of mercury; OSA 
= 
obstructive sleep apnea; PSG 
= 
polysomnography; RAD 
= 
reactive airway disease; DD 
= 
developmental delay; PAP 
= 
positive airway pressure.

aDescription from PSG done at referring institution; no specific value available. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 153 

After bi-level PAP was prescribed, his mother made no attempt to use bi-level 
PAP with Buzz prior to his admission to the hospital and the initiation. Prior 
to the initiation of behavior therapy, the nursing staff made several attempts 
to administer PAP, and Buzz responded with distress behavior and attempts to 
physically escape the mask. 

Trevor is a morbidly obese, developmentally delayed 3-year and 5-month-old 
African American boy who is diagnosed with Prader–Willi syndrome, obesity, 
cor pulmonale, and developmental delay. He was referred for admission to our 
pediatric rehabilitation hospital from the pediatric intensive care unit at another 
hospital where he had been admitted on four different occasions for reactive 
airway disease and acute respiratory distress. At 2 years of age, his mother 
reported him to have restless sleep and snoring. Two different attempts were 
made to conduct polysomnography at the referring hospital. These attempts 
produced enough data to diagnose OSA and led to a tonsilloadenoidectomy, but 
this did not resolve the OSA. Consequently, treatment with bi-level PAP was 
recommended. During one outpatient pediatric pulmonary clinic visit, Trevor’s 
percentage oxygen saturation level had been measured in the low 80s. When he 
was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit, his oxygen saturation levels 
increased to the mid to upper 90s after 1 or 2 days of bi-level PAP. According 
to parental report, Trevor refused to comply with bi-level PAP after he was 
discharged to his home. When attempts were made to apply the bi-level PAP 
mask, he demonstrated verbal refusal, crying, head turning, blocking attempts 
to place the mask, and running away. Therefore, Trevor was admitted to our 
inpatient rehabilitation unit for bi-level PAP adherence training as well as weight 
reduction. 

Ernie is a 3-year and 3-month-old Caucasian boy who was diagnosed with 
several medical anomalies at birth including right renal agenesis, right lung hypoplasia, 
absent right rib and kidney, vertebral anomalies, scoliosis, and failure 
to thrive. He had hypercarbia due to his lung disease, and he also had delayed 
expressive language development. His mother received day and evening nursing 
assistance, and the assigned nurse accompanied Ernie and his mother to outpatient 
sessions to participate in the behavioral training. According to parent 
report, Ernie had demonstrated anxious behaviors associated with wearing the 
bi-level PAP mask during the initial attempt at conducting a sleep study when he 
reacted with numerous disruptive behaviors (i.e., screaming, crying, and pushing 
away the mask). Although Ernie also engaged in disruptive behaviors during a 
second sleep study, enough results were obtained to allow a treatment decision. 
Ernie’s parents did not attempt to use the mask at night following the sleep study. 
Therefore they were instructed to seek outpatient behavior therapy services for 
bi-level PAP adherence training. On initial evaluation for outpatient services, 
parents reported that Ernie would cry and begin to have a tantrum whenever he 


154 SLIFER ET AL. 

saw the bi-level PAP device, so they hid it at home and never used it because 
they did not want to upset him. 

Setting and Materials 

Master’s level behaviorally trained therapists under the supervision of a pediatric 
psychologist with expertise in applied behavior analysis treated each of the 
children. For Indigo, Buzz, and Trevor, all training sessions were conducted in 
their rehabilitation hospital rooms. For Ernie, who was treated on an outpatient 
basis, sessions were conducted in clinic room at the same pediatric rehabilitation 
hospital. 

Measurement 

Adherence with PAP therapy was assessed and recorded using the PAP task 
analysis published by Koontz et al. (2003), which breaks the behavior required 
for adherence into an ordered sequence of component steps (see Table 2). Child 
adherence was scored for each step that the child completed within 10 sec of 
the verbal prompt, with or without assistance and without escape–avoidance 
behavior. The percentage of steps of the task analysis during which the child 
was compliant was calculated as follows: the number of steps with adherence, 
divided by the total number of steps in the task analysis, multiplied by 100. 
Adherence data in terms of hours of use were obtained from written records 
kept by nursing staff, one-to-one behavioral aides or parents. Twenty-four hour 
data sheets with 1-hr time intervals were completed by inpatient nurses or assigned 
behavioral rehabilitation assistants (for Indigo, Buzz, and Trevor) or 
the parent or home nurse (for Ernie). For each time block, whether the child 
was asleep and wearing the bi-level PAP was recorded. Ernie’s mother also 
recorded the number of hours cumulated on the time monitor of his bi-level PAP 
machine. 

During follow-up, Indigo’s mother recorded what time the mask was placed 
and what time the child fell asleep with the mask on each night. In the morning, 
she recorded what time the child awakened and whether the mask was still in 
place when she went to remove it. Similarly, after discharge from the rehabilitation 
unit, Trevor’s parents recorded the number of hours the PAP was worn and 
the number (if any) of removals of the mask by the child requiring the parent to 
replace it. The parents were alerted to mask removals by the monitor alarm on 
the PAP machine (Indigo, Buzz, and Trevor) or the low oxygen saturation limit 
alarm on the child’s pulse oximeter (Ernie). The follow-up data were provided 
to the therapists who made telephone inquiries (daily at first, and then weekly, 
bi-weekly, and monthly). 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 155 

TABLE 2 
Bilevel Positive Airway Pressure (PAP) Task Analysis 

No. 
Action 

1. 
The child sits on the bed or stretcher. 
2. 
The child cooperates with having the Bilevel PAP cap placed on the back of head. 
3. 
The child lies in the supine position on the bed–stretcher. 
4. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is placed 
in position on the face for 5 sec. 
5. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is placed 
in position on the face for 10 sec. 
6. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (not attached to the hose or cap) is placed 
in position on the face for 1 min. 
7. 
The child remains supine and calm while one side of the mask is attached to the cap. (Prior 
to next step, the mask will need to be connected to the tube and the tube will need to be 
connected to the machine.) 
8. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to the hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 3 sec. 
9. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to the hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 5 sec. 
10. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to the hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 10 sec. 
11. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to the hose and one side of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 1 min. 
12. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask is placed in position on the face and is 
connected to the cap on both sides for 1 min. 
13. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 1 min. 
14. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 5 min. 
15. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and both sides of the 
cap) is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 10 min. 
16. 
The child remains supine and calm while the mask (attached to hose and one side of the cap) 
is placed in position on the face and while the air is turned on for 15 min. 
Reprinted with permission from: Koontz, K. L., Slifer, K. J., Cataldo, M. D., & Marcus, C. L. 
(2003). Improving pediatric compliance with positive airway pressure: The impact of behavior 
intervention. Sleep, 26(8), 1010–1015. 

Assessment of the Fit and Comfort of the PAP Mask 

Before commencing behavioral therapy for PAP adherence, each child was evaluated 
by a nurse, respiratory therapist, and the behavior therapist to determine if 
the child’s mask fit properly and if there was evidence of pressure marks on the 
skin or air leaks into the eyes causing unnecessary discomfort to the child. If so, 
appropriate modifications were made. For example, for Indigo a petite size “gel 
mask” was obtained as well as an appropriate spacer, a medium soft cap, and 


156 SLIFER ET AL. 

heated humidification of the air from the PAP machine. In addition a machine 
with a delayed pressure “ramp up” function was employed. Similarly, Buzz was 
switched to a gel mask, and for Ernie and Trevor several mask options were 
tried until the respiratory therapist accomplished the most optimal fit possible. 

Behavioral Conceptualization, Terms, and Techniques 
(See Appendix A for a Glossary of Behavioral Terms) 

To increase adherence with PAP, young children must learn to relax and tolerate 
the novel and moderately uncomfortable stimulation involved with the regimen. 
When children experience uncomfortable or aversive stimulation, they instinctively 
attempt to withdraw from its source, physically escape its proximity, and 
avoid contact with it in the future. If the experience is intense enough during 
a single exposure, or repeated frequently enough, the child may develop conditioned 
autonomic nervous system arousal (a.k.a. conditioned anxiety) when 
exposed to stimuli (sights, sounds, and smells) that have been associated with 
the aversive stimulation. They often develop a conditioned avoidance response 
such that whenever the stimuli associated with aversive stimulation are encountered, 
the child not only becomes physiologically aroused but also attempts to 
physically avoid the situation. It is common for children to fall back on a whole 
class of escape–avoidance motivated behaviors when they perceive an aversive 
stimulus to be imminent. Such behavior may include crying, running, hitting, 
kicking, spitting, head turning, pushing away, and so forth. Well-intended caregivers 
typically respond to these behaviors by attempting to comfort, coax, or 
reason with the child to obtain adherence. Some caregivers learn to avoid the 
child’s distress and disruptive behavior by removing or protecting (or both) the 
child from the threatening situation. This is ordinarily an adaptive parenting response, 
but it is counterproductive with respect to obtaining child adherence with 
a medical regimen. In these ways both child and parent behaviors are motivated 
by their escape–avoidance function. 

Caregivers attempting to implement PAP typically react to child distress by 
trying to calm the child (lengthy verbal explanations, coaxing, apologies, and 
expressions of affection) and removing the mask in response to child distress 
(either temporarily or for the rest of the night). This can inadvertently strengthen 
the distress and escape–avoidance behavior. With repetition of this parent–child 
interaction pattern, the child can develop an elaborate and persistent repertoire 
of distress and disruptive behavior in response to the mask, which defeats the 
caregiver’s willingness to persist with the regimen. Therefore, the goal of behavioral 
intervention is to decrease or eliminate the escape–avoidance function of 
the distress and disruptive behavior, and to positively reinforce approximations 
of adherence with wearing the mask. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 157 

Assessment, Training, and Intervention Procedures 

Baseline—Behavioral and reinforcer assessments. Each child was observed 
during one or two PAP placement attempts at either naptime or bedtime, 
and initial adherence data were obtained. During this session, the therapist also 
obtained information about the child’s favorite activities that might be used to 
relax, distract, and motivate the child (e.g., snacks, bubbles, videogames, movies, 
singing, small rewards, etc.). 

The behavioral interventions applied in this study (outlined in Table 3) involve 
three general procedures: counterconditioning, escape prevention (a.k.a. “escape 
extinction”), and teaching (a.k.a. “shaping”) cooperative behavior. 

Counterconditioning. Children may cry, scream, block the placement of 
the mask, or try to escape the procedure—all indicating that the child perceives 
some aspect of the procedure (usually the fit of the mask or the sensation of the 
air pressure) as uncomfortable and anxiety inducing. During counterconditioning, 
the child’s conditioned anxiety is treated by carefully planned, graduated 
exposure to the mask, equipment, and air pressure while the child participates 
in a distracting, pleasurable activity. The activity must be one that produces an 

TABLE 3 
Summary of Behavioral Techniques Employed to Increase Adherence with Positive Airway 
Pressure (PAP) (See Appendix A for More Explanation) 


No. 
Technique 

1. 
Positive reinforcement: providing a preferred item or activity contingent on a target behavior 
one wishes to strengthen. 
2. 
Negative reinforcement: removing an aversive or non-preferred item or activity contingent on 
a target behavior one wishes to strengthen. 
3. 
Differential reinforcement: providing a reinforcer in response to behaviors one wishes to increase, 
but not in response to those one intends to decrease. 
4. 
Reinforcer assessment: determining effective consequences for strengthening behavior for a 
particular individual. 
5. 
Task analysis: breaking a complex behavior or task into component steps, presenting them one 
step at a time, and documenting how many of the steps can be accomplished without formal 
behavioral intervention. 
6. 
Counterconditioning: modifying conditioned anxiety by carefully planned, graduated exposure 
to the feared or non-preferred stimulus while engaging the patient in a distracting, relaxing, or 
otherwise pleasurable activity. 
7. 
Shaping: using differential reinforcement to teach successive approximations of a target behavior. 
8. 
Escape prevention (escape extinction): blocking the patient’s escape from a feared or non-
preferred stimulus, thereby weakening the escape behavior that has been maintained by negative 
reinforcement. 

158 SLIFER ET AL. 

emotional state that is incompatible with anxiety (i.e., pleasure and relaxation). 
Once the child appears relaxed and to be enjoying the activity, gradual exposure 
to PAP equipment is accomplished by slowly increasing the child’s proximity 
to the equipment and the duration of contact with the mask, air pressure, and 
so forth. 

Shaping. As the child experiences reduction of anxiety and exhibits fewer 
avoidant responses to the procedure through counterconditioning, compliant behaviors 
can be strengthened using differential reinforcement of successive approximations. 
Differential reinforcement refers to providing preferred items or 
events in response to those behaviors to be increased in frequency (e.g., adherence), 
but not in response to those ones intended to decrease (e.g., pushing away 
the mask). As the child demonstrates less avoidance and greater adherence, task 
difficulty or duration (or both) can be gradually increased. Then the child will be 
able to progress through more steps of the task-analyzed regimen. The achievement 
of adherence at each level of the task analysis increases the frequency 
with which the child experiences success without feeling overwhelmed by any 
discomfort involved. 

During the procedure referred to as escape prevention (escape extinction), 
caregivers are taught to block or prevent the child’s escape–avoidance by using 
brief verbal prompting, redirection to a specific activity or task, and if necessary 
physically blocking escape while gently guiding the child to remain in 
the situation. The child’s attempts to block or remove the mask must be physically 
interrupted, and the mask must be immediately replaced every time the 
child successfully removes it. When teaching a child to adhere to a PAP regimen, 
escape prevention is used in conjunction with the counterconditioning and 
differential reinforcement procedures described previously. By blocking escape 
behavior, the caregiver enables the child to experience each step of the task 
analysis, whereas also having positive experiences (e.g., distraction, relaxation, 
and reinforcement). 

Treatment consisted of behavioral rehearsal sessions during which PAP equipment 
and application were presented one step at a time according to the sequence 
outlined in the PAP task analysis (Table 2). Each child had demonstrated evidence 
of conditioned anxiety and escape-motivated disruptive behaviors in response 
to attempts to implement the PAP regimen. Therefore, treatment procedures 
were presented at a challenging rate, but not so as to over-arouse the child. 
This process created a neutral, safe environment for learning. It also allowed 
the child to experience immediate success with initial steps in the PAP routine. 
Furthermore, it helped to develop positive momentum for greater probability 
of adherence during subsequent sessions when duration of exposure, proximity 
to equipment, and discomfort were increased. Each child was first prompted to 
lie or sit on the bed. The therapist then employed distraction using the child’s 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 159 

preferred activities (e.g., singing, bubbles, movies, etc.) to decrease the child’s 
attention to PAP-related stimuli with the goal of decreasing the child’s perception 
of any unavoidable uncomfortable sensations. The preferred activity also 
provided an antecedent intervention to increase the child’s relaxation and willingness 
to approach the therapist and training environment, rather than attempting 
to avoid or escape them with disruptive behavior. The therapist then gradually 
exposed the child to the sensations caused by the PAP equipment and therapy 
while prompting the child to continue participating in the preferred activity. The 
therapist ignored any negative vocalizations or avoidance behaviors (or both) 
during the procedure. The therapist intermittently reassured the child (e.g., “You 
can do it. You will be OK”). To teach the child that attempts to remove the 
mask would no longer be successful (escape extinction) and to increase tolerance 
of PAP, any attempts to remove the mask were physically interrupted, and 
the child’s hands were directed away from the mask and toward the distracting 
activity. The therapist consistently provided reinforcement (e.g., enthusiastic 
verbal praise and stickers) contingent on calm adherence with steps in the PAP 
routine. The child progressed gradually through the hierarchy of steps on the 
PAP task analysis. Earned stickers were exchanged at the end of the training 
session for a tangible reward (e.g., prize, appropriate snack, or playing a game 
with the therapist). After the child was able to comfortably tolerate each step of 
the task analysis during behavioral rehearsal sessions, treatment efforts focused 
on the increasing duration of wearing the PAP at night. 

Caregiver Training and Procedures for 
Adherence Promotion 

Parents and other available caregivers were also assisted in developing a consistent 
and minimally changing bedtime routine lasting approximately 30 min 
prior to bedtime that included soothing activities and always culminated with 
donning the PAP and lying down in bed to go to sleep. The therapist for each 
child also provided direct training on the intervention procedures to the assigned 
nurses for hospitalized patients (Indigo, Buzz, and Trevor), for the caregiving 
parent or parents (all 4 children), and for several home health nurses (only available 
for Ernie). Important caregiver training considerations are listed in Table 4. 
Specifically, therapists demonstrated (modeled) each intervention technique, including 
giving developmentally appropriate instructions, use of distraction, differential 
positive reinforcement, and escape extinction. Parents and staff were 
taught to implement the behavioral intervention using demonstrations, verbal 
and written instructions, role play, in vivo behavioral rehearsal with the child, 
and provision of corrective verbal feedback. For the 3 children who were inpatients 
(Indigo, Buzz, and Trevor), the number of parent training sessions varied 
depending on the parents’ hospital visitation schedule; availability for training 


160 SLIFER ET AL. 
No. 
TABLE 4 
Caregiver Training Considerations 
Question 

1. 
Does the parent have effective child behavior management skills in general? 
2. 
Are their practical barriers to parent training such as lack of transportation, lack of child care 
for other children in the family, difficulty getting time off work, or living distance from clinic? 
3. 
Does that parent have assistance from other family members with implementing the behavioral 
intervention procedures at home (particularly during the night)? 
4. 
Does the caregiver have cognitive deficits, memory impairment, or medical or mental health 
problems that might interfere with learning and implementing the behavioral protocol? 
5. 
Are in-home behavior or nursing services needed (or both), and is there funding for these 
services? 
6. 
Is the parent willing and able to participate in a process of ongoing behavioral intervention, 
parent training, and problem solving over repeated sessions? 
7. 
Does the caregiver fully comprehend the health risks and potential consequences of nonadherence 
with PAP? 
8. 
Is the caregiver willing and able to tolerate seeing the child temporarily in distress to obtain 
long-term medical, cognitive, and behavioral benefits for the child? 
sessions; and involved 7, 5, and 10 sessions, respectively. Because Ernie was 
seen as an outpatient with his mother and home health nurse, parent or nurse 
education and training (or both) were provided to some degree during each of 
the 53 outpatient clinic visits (bi-weekly, weekly, monthly, and then bi-monthly). 
Ernie was the only 1 of the 3 participants who had resources available to fund 
in-home nursing both before and after behavioral intervention. However, these 
services were available primarily during the day shift and only intermittently 
at night. Therefore, implementing the bi-level PAP and behavioral procedures 
was primarily the mother’s responsibility at night, as was the case for the other 
3 children. Both the mother and stepfather were trained for Indigo; the mother, 
father, and one grandparent were trained for Trevor; but only the mother was 
trained for Buzz, because no other caregivers were available to assist his mother 
after his discharge from the rehabilitation hospital. 

Experimental Design 

A single-participant experimental design was used to evaluate the efficacy of behavioral 
training. Specifically, a prospective, repeated measure, non-concurrent 
multiple baseline across 4-participants design was employed. This design allowed 
us to select four consecutive cases that met the following characteristic: 

(a) between 36 and 72 months of age; (b) has congenital or acquired developmental 
delay; (c) already has compromised health status related to or exacerbated 
by OSA; and (d) has been prescribed, but is not currently adherent with, a PAP 

BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 161 

regimen. There were no other children meeting all of these same criteria during 
the same 2-year time period who were targeted for study, but subsequently failed 
or dropped out. The non-concurrent multiple baseline design (also sometimes 
called a moving treatment design) is a hybrid that includes the features of a 
case series with an A–B (baseline–intervention) sequence replicated across several 
participants. One advantage of the traditional multiple baseline design over 
a case series is the inclusion of varying numbers of baseline observations. This 
allows the investigator to document that similar behavior change is observed 
in each participant only after the change from baseline to treatment conditions 
(Hayes, 1981; Watson & Workman, 1981). In a standard multiple-baseline design, 
two or more participants enter a study at approximately the same time 
for baseline assessment. After baseline assessment, one participant then begins 
treatment, whereas the others continue to be observed under baseline conditions. 
After a time delay, the second participant enters treatment, and baseline measures 
continue for any remaining participants. They too subsequently enter treatment 
after a time delay. Sequential replications across participants demonstrate that 
participants’ behavior changes only when treatment is in effect, thereby supporting 
the hypothesis that the treatment caused the change. 

In a non-concurrent multiple baseline design, the requirement that each participant 
begins baseline at approximately the same time is relaxed. This makes it 
possible to use data from several participants seen at different times, but requires 
that their baseline phases are of different lengths. When treatment effects are 
replicated in different cases, seen at different times, after baselines of different 
durations, arguments that the observed change in behavior occurred due to some 
confounding variable other than treatment can be considered more improbable. 

RESULTS 

Figure 1 presents data on the percentage of steps in the task analysis completed 
per session for Ernie. This figure illustrates how the percentage of steps measure 
was used to document child adherence while gradually increasing exposure to 
the equipment and duration of the PAP. Figure 2 displays data on the total hours 
per night of wearing the PAP equipment across baseline and treatment conditions 
for the 4 children, respectively. In addition to visual inspection and comparison 
of the single-participant data across baseline and behavioral intervention conditions, 
the data also were analyzed using one-participant t 
tests in which the mean 
steps completed and the mean hours of PAP use during behavioral intervention 
were compare to their baseline levels of zero percentage of steps and 0 hr of 
use, respectively. The results of these analyses indicate a significant difference 
between baseline and treatment conditions for both percentage of steps completed 
(baseline assessment = 
0%, M 
treatment percentage = 
90.5, SD 
= 
6.7), 


162 SLIFER ET AL. 


FIGURE 1 Percentage of steps in the task analysis completed per session by Ernie. This 
figure illustrates how the percentage of steps measure was used to document child adherence 
while gradually increasing exposure to the equipment and duration of the positive airway 
pressure. 

t(3) 
= 
26.74, p 
= 
.000, and number of hours per day of PAP adherence 
(baseline assessment = 
0, M 
treatment = 
8.0 hr, SD 
= 
1.86), t(3) 
= 
8.63, 
p 
= 
.003, respectively. 

Indigo 

The top panel of Figure 2 shows the data on hours of use per day for Indigo. 
During baseline assessment she verbally and physically refused the PAP mask 
with crying, distress vocalizations, and attempts to block or hit (or both) care 
providers. Behavioral intervention began with individual daytime training sessions 
of approximately 30 min each conducted across 3 days. During these sessions, 
distraction with cartoon videos, counting, singing, stickers, bubbles, and 
imaginary play were provided as graduated exposure to the PAP equipment was 
conducted. Differential positive social reinforcement was provided contingent 
on approximations of calm adherence. 

Indigo tolerated each step of the task analysis and wore the PAP mask during 
the daytime training sessions with minimal initial distress. However, her positive 
response did not generalize when PAP was introduced at night (Day 5 on Figure 
2). Her nonadherence with the procedure appeared to be related to distress 
associated with increased air pressure and disorientation when awakened with 
the mask on. On two exposure trials (Days 7 and 8) Indigo required physical 
prompting to prevent her from removing the mask. Thereafter, except on one 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 163 


FIGURE 2 Total hours per night of wearing the positive airway pressure equipment across 
baseline and treatment conditions for Indigo, Buzz, Ernie, and Trevor, respectively. 


164 SLIFER ET AL. 

occasion for a few seconds when the air pressure was increased, Indigo demonstrated 
adherence with the mask and did not require further physical prompting. 
The therapist then provided training in the behavioral intervention to the parents 
and medical staff. In addition, they were provided with a written behavioral protocol 
with specific recommendations for conducting the PAP routine, especially 
initial placement of the mask and replacing it every time it was removed, as 
well as using distraction and differential positive reinforcement. Follow-up data 
provided by parent report indicate that Indigo wore her PAP during her scheduled 
time in bed, which was 10 hr per night, based on data sheets that indicate 
bedtime, awakening, and whether the mask was still in place in the morning 
when her mother entered Indigo’s room to remove the mask. It should be noted 
that Indigo’s data displayed in the top panel of Figure 2 shows a ceiling effect 
at 10 hr because the data sheet used to record her adherence was structured 
with ten 1-hr time blocks. Therefore, when her adherence was at 100%, the 
maximum time was 10 hr. Indigo displayed only occasional mild distress with 
the PAP, which was easily interrupted and redirected by prompting her to focus 
on a calm but distracting bedtime activity. 

Buzz 

Data on the hours per day that Buzz wore his PAP are shown on the second 
panel of Figure 2. During baseline he exhibited distress while the mask was 
being placed on him, and he attempted to avoid or escape it by crying, rolling 
away from it, blocking its placement with his hands, or removing it once it was 
on his face. 

When the behavioral intervention was introduced (Day 3, Figure 2), Buzz 
was instructed to sit in bed and play a videogame until he was relaxed and 
distracted. Then the PAP mask was placed on his face for 1 sec, and escape– 
avoidant behaviors were blocked. After this exposure was completed, Buzz was 
provided a sticker as reinforcement. Within the first daytime practice session 
Buzz was able to tolerate the mask for only 5 sec. During the second such session 
Buzz was able to tolerate the mask for increasing intervals without any escape– 
avoidance behaviors. On the third day of intervention (Day 5 on Figure 2), 
while using the video for distraction, Buzz was encouraged to lie down while 
wearing his mask, and he fell asleep wearing it within 5 min, without additional 
prompts. 

A bedtime routine was established for him, which included concrete verbal 
prompts, escape–extinction for initial placement and repositioning of the mask, 
distraction with video, and delayed positive reinforcement (videogame and 1:1 
social attention) the following day for keeping the mask on during the night. The 
therapist trained several nurses to implement the behavioral intervention, and a 
written protocol was distributed to all nurses who would interact with Buzz. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 165 

After this training, the nurses began to implement the protocol at night and during 
daytime naps (Day 7 on Figure 2). The therapist was available by pager and 
telephone to consult with the nursing staff when questions or problems arose. 
Buzz nearly always complied with wearing his PAP when the nursing staff 
implemented the behavioral protocol. When first introduced to the behavioral 
protocol, some nurses did not consistently replace the mask when Buzz removed 
it. Some also were less consistent with blocking escape behavior when reapplying 
the mask. This absence of the escape extinction treatment component, lead to 
decreased hours of use (e.g., Days 13–15, 17–18, and 24–25) and prompted additional 
training for nursing staff. After 26 days Buzz was consistently wearing 
his PAP for between 8 and 10 hr per night without distress. Prior to discharge, 
his mother was trained on the behavioral protocol, and demonstrated successful 
implementation. Unfortunately, no follow-up data could be obtained for Buzz 
because the family could not be reached after discharge. 

Ernie 

The percentage of steps in the PAP task analysis that Ernie tolerated per session 
is shown in Figure 1, and the total number of hours per day that he wore the 
PAP is shown on the third panel of Figure 2. During baseline assessment Ernie 
was distressed whenever he saw the PAP mask or other parts of the equipment. 
He tolerated touching the mask with his hand for up to 5 sec, but would not 
allow the mask to be placed on or near his face. After the baseline assessment he 
initially attended an average of two brief outpatient visits per week to gradually 
expose him to wearing the mask. 

Clinic intervention sessions first targeted increasing his tolerance for wearing 
the mask without the connecting tubing attached. The duration was gradually 
increased from 5 sec to 20 min. After he could reliably wear the mask without 
distress for 20 min the therapist gradually exposed Ernie to wearing the 
mask with the connecting tubing attached and airflow turned on at gradually 
increasing pressure settings (as approved by his physicians) until achieving the 
prescribed setting. Next the therapist gradually increased the duration of time 
Ernie was required to wear the mask. When he tolerated wearing the mask for 
up to 1 hr without showing signs of distress, the therapist scheduled clinic visits 
during Ernie’s naptime and conducted a home visit for observation and caregiver 
training. Prior to the home visit, his mother had Ernie practice wearing 
the mask at home at bedtime for gradually increasing durations as instructed by 
the therapist during clinic sessions. He continued to wear the mask successfully 
during clinic sessions, but engaged in disruptive behavior and tantrums at home. 
The therapist next scheduled visits in which either the parent or Ernie’s home 
healthcare nurse guided him through the PAP routine. The therapist was faded 
from the sessions and finally out of the room completely. After these fading 


166 SLIFER ET AL. 

procedures, Ernie increased his tolerance of wearing the mask at home during 
both naptime and bedtime. He was allowed to trade in tokens (stickers) earned 
for PAP adherence at home for prizes when he came to the next clinic visit. 
According to data collected by his mother and home nurses, Ernie now regularly 
wears his mask during naps and nighttime sleep. His hours of PAP use typically 
exceed 10 hr per day including nighttime sleep and naps. 

Trevor 

The number of hours per day that Trevor wore his PAP is shown on the bottom 
panel of Figure 2. During the first two nights of his inpatient stay (baseline), he 
refused to wear the PAP. Before introducing the behavioral intervention at night, 
Trevor’s adherence with PAP was assessed at his regular bedtime using the task 
analysis data sheet. Trevor complied with holding the mask on his face without 
the air on, making no attempt to escape the procedure. Trevor also complied 
with the mask being placed in position with air on for 3 sec, but with longer 
exposure he exhibited head turns, verbal refusal, crying, and blocking or pushing 
away the mask from his face with his hands. 

PAP adherence training began on Day 3 during Trevor’s regularly scheduled 
naptime. Initially, Trevor was instructed to sit in bed and watch an animated 
video until he was relaxed and distracted. Then the PAP mask was placed on his 
face for 1 sec, and any avoidance or escape behaviors physically blocked. While 
Trevor was wearing the mask, he also was engaged in preferred activities such 
as singing. During the first practice trial, he was able to wear the mask with 
the air turned on for 10 min. During the second practice trial conducted that 
evening at bedtime, Trevor was able to fall asleep with the PAP on, and tolerated 
it for 3.52 hr without attempting to remove it. However, he awoke during the 
night and removed the mask four times. By Day 4 he wore the PAP for 6 hr 
with no negative behavior. Ultimately he awoke and removed the mask four 
times during that night, but the nursing staff had been trained to consistently 
reapply the mask. He did not wear PAP at all on Day 6 because an unfamiliar 
nurse did not implement the escape extinction (blocking) part of the behavioral 
intervention. On Day 7, he continued to periodically remove his mask during 
the night, but tolerated its replacement and went back to sleep. Thereafter, he 
complied with wearing his PAP an average of 8.28 hr per night. Although he 
continued to periodically remove the mask during the night, he demonstrated 
increased duration of wearing it (average of 7 hr per night) before removing it. 
In addition, the frequency of mask removal during the night decreased to one 
or not at all. After 10 days with behavioral intervention, he consistently wore 
his PAP for between 8 and 13 hr per night. 

Prior to discharge, his mother and father were trained on the behavioral protocol, 
and demonstrated its successful implementation. Follow-up data provided 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 167 

by his mother indicates that Trevor continues to wear his PAP at home during the 
night (approximately 7 hr per night) and although he will periodically remove 
the mask, caregivers are able to reapply it without opposition. 

DISCUSSION 

A PAP adherence training protocol was implemented using a combination of 
behavior therapy techniques. These techniques include (a) conducting a task 
analysis of the regimen; (b) providing distraction from uncomfortable sensations 
using preferred activities; (c) counterconditioning emotional arousal by providing 
preferred activities to induce a relaxed, positive state; (d) maintaining the child’s 
positive state while gradually exposing him or her to the steps in the task analysis 
and the associated sensations; (e) differential reinforcement of partial adherence 
by providing contingent praise and positive events (including mask removal by 
the therapist after a given interval of child adherence); and (f) placing escape– 
avoidance behavior on extinction (by interrupting, blocking, or redirecting these 
behaviors). This “package” of procedures appears to have been effective for 
desensitizing these 4 preschool children (with developmental delay, behavior 
problems, and serious health conditions) to bi-level PAP. Prior to behavioral 
training, none of the children were consistently wearing the PAP equipment. 
After behavior therapy and caregiver training, all of the children were able to 
successfully tolerate PAP and markedly increased their hours of use. 

The cases presented in this study provide strong preliminary evidence of the 
benefits of this multi-component behavioral intervention for increasing adherence 
and decreasing distress during PAP use by young children with developmental 
disabilities, behavior problems, and serious health conditions. Consequently, 
these high-risk children were more likely to benefit from their prescribed 
PAP regimen. These clinical outcome data are encouraging because these patients 
were especially challenging due to their young age, developmental delay, 
and medical status. All 4 had demonstrated a pattern of escalating distress and 
disruptive behavior when initial attempts were made to implement PAP. 

The results provide additional support for the feasibility of PAP for breathing 
problems in preschool-age children, provided that a consistent behavioral training 
protocol is implemented. The behavioral intervention described here is based 
on previous studies demonstrating the utility of behavior analysis and therapy for 
increasing child adherence and coping with uncomfortable medical procedures 
such as gynecological exams (Dahlquist et al., 1984), tracheostomy suctioning 
and care (DeRowe et al., 2003; Derrickson et al., 1991; Slifer et al., 1995), self-
catheterization (McComas et al., 1999; Neef et al., 1989), neuroimaging (Slifer 
et al., 1993; Slifer, Koontz, & Cataldo, 2002), radiation therapy (Hawkins, 1991; 
Slifer, 1996; Slifer, Bucholtz, & Cataldo, 1994), and needle sticks (Dahlquist, 


168 SLIFER ET AL. 

1992; Slifer et al., 1995; Slifer, Eischen, & Busby, 2002; Slifer, Eischen, Tucker, 
et al., 2002; Slifer, Tucker, & Dahlquist, 2002). These results add additional 
support to previous published non-experimental, clinical outcome data (Koontz 
et al., 2003) on the use of a similar behavioral intervention to aid adherence of 
pediatric patients with PAP. However, in this study, repeated measures data were 
recorded, and a systematic single-participant experimental design was employed. 
The combined results of these two studies add to the literature supporting the use 
of behavior therapy to increase the adherence of children with health-sustaining 
medical technology—even those who are quite young, developmentally disabled, 
and have acutely challenging medical conditions. Because of skill deficits, anxiety, 
behavioral distress, and neurocognitive sequelae of their disease, many such 
children do not receive the health sustaining benefits of available interventions 
such as PAP. The consequences can be life threatening (i.e., cor pulmonale) 
or gradually lead to neuropsychological insult from chronic hypoxia or sleep 
fragmentation or both (Halbower & Mahone, 2006). The medical alternatives 
for these children often are more invasive (e.g., tracheostomy), have significant 
risks, and child adherence may still be required for success and safety (e.g., the 
child must not dislodge the tracheostomy tube or connection with the source of 
oxygen and tolerate routine tracheostomy care). 

Conclusions that can be drawn from this study are limited by the small sample 
size. However, results reported here and elsewhere (Koontz et al., 2003) suggest 
that when physicians prescribe PAP for treatment of OSA or other breathing 
disorders in children, behavioral intervention is important for increasing the 
probability of successful utilization. We recommend that when physicians prescribe 
PAP or similar regimens for children, the family should be referred to 
a behavior therapist that can train the child to cope with the equipment and 
assist the caregiver in identifying and overcoming barriers to consistent regimen 
adherence. 

The results obtained in this study suggest that caregiver consistency and patience 
are important for long-term adherence. When the behavioral training was 
implemented, there was considerable variability in the number of minutes, or 
ultimately hours, the child could tolerate the PAP. None of the children showed 
an immediate and sustained improvement in their adherence. This was due, in 
part, to the difficulty of training all assigned nurses and ensuring that the behavioral 
intervention was implemented consistently. That consistency was difficult 
to maintain even with trained pediatric nurses on an inpatient basis, underscores 
the challenge involved in establishing and maintaining PAP adherence. Other 
variables that determine adherence are not well understood, but most certainly 
are not static. That is, even well-trained caregivers may be more or less diligent 
about implementing the behavioral procedures from day to day. Caregiver 
resources and emotional reserve vary. Furthermore, the quality of the child’s 
sleep also can vary for reasons not directly related to the breathing problems 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 169 

and PAP. For example, sleep can be affected by diet, exercise, medical status, 
environmental disturbance, change in or lack of routine, and emotional status. 
If a child sleeps less soundly, the probability of awakening or partial arousal 
during the night increases. At these times the child may become confused and 
not remember the mask or rules about wearing it. When not fully alert, the child 
may be more acutely aware of discomfort from the mask or airflow, become 
more distressed than when fully awake, and be more likely to reflexively grab 
and dislodge the mask. We recommend that the child be taught to tolerate the 
mask when fully awake and that adherence at night be regarded as a “longer term 
project.” If the child’s medical condition is so tenuous that such an approach to 
adherence is prohibited, then more medically invasive alternatives may need to 
be considered. Although attempting to put on the equipment by stealth after the 
child is asleep occasionally may be successful on some nights, ultimately it is 
a shortsighted and ineffective. 

An obvious reason for adherence problems is the use of suboptimal pressures. 
Pressures that are too high for the clinical situation can increase arousal from 
sleep and overall discomfort that includes ear pain, headache, dry eyes from 
mask leak, and difficulty exhaling. Pressures that are too low to overcome the 
obstructed breathing problem can cause a subjective feeling of suffocation or 
air hunger when the child attempts to inhale while wearing a mask. It behooves 
the pulmonologist to ensure adequate ventilation on proper settings during the 
PAP titration in a sleep laboratory. Oftentimes, repeat sleep studies are helpful 
once the patient is complying with the PAP therapy so that fine-tuning can be 
performed, especially when the first estimate of pressure requirement was based 
on a suboptimal night’s sleep. Additionally, humidifiers often improve adherence 
where nasal or sinus irritation ensues from dry airflow at high pressures. 

Obviously it would be preferable to avoid the development of escape-motivated 
distress in response to PAP in the first place. It is recommended that young 
and developmentally disabled children be referred proactively to a behavior therapist 
that can collaborate with a respiratory therapist or nurse educator to select 
the proper mask, cap, and other necessary equipment, as well as identify the 
type of distraction and reinforcement contingencies that best suit the particular 
child. They could then introduce the child and family to the PAP sensations and 
routine in a systematic and non-traumatic manner. Ideally, these children also 
should be similarly trained prior to attempting polysomnography to prevent, if 
possible, the development of conditioned anxiety and escape behavior that would 
subsequently interfere with PAP adherence. Such proactive intervention may facilitate 
the child’s coping such that fewer behavior therapy sessions would be 
required than was the case for the children presented in this study. 

Based on our experiences with these children and families, it seems clear that 
child adherence and long-term adherence are dependent on caregiver vigilance 
and diligence. There is no getting around the fact that if the child dislodges the 


170 SLIFER ET AL. 

mask in the night, whether intentional or unintentional, the caregiver must discover 
the problem and replace the mask. To do otherwise functionally results in 
negative reinforcement of escape behavior (pushing the mask out of place or removing 
it relieves the child’s immediate discomfort). For this reason, caregivers 
need to be assisted with creative ways to monitor PAP status during the night. 
Some PAP machines are equipped with an alarm that sounds if the mask is removed 
or not positioned properly. However, even those with alarms may not be 
loud enough to awaken an exhausted and soundly sleeping caregiver. We have 
recommended that caregivers use a high-quality baby monitor to amplify the 
alarm and monitor the sounds of the child stirring or awakening. Alternatively, 
some caregivers at first choose to set an alarm clock to awaken at intervals to 
check and, if necessary, replace the mask. Still other parents of young children 
opt to have the child sleep in or near the parent’s bed to facilitate monitoring the 
child’s status. Even in the best cases with the most highly motivated parents, the 
process of establishing long-term PAP adherence is imperfect and takes time. 

The number and type of problems that impacted our attempts to train parents 
and other caregivers varied across children. For example, both of Indigo’s 
parents were present, were available for training, and actively participated in 
the behavior protocol. On the other hand, Buzz’s mother was a single parent, 
had two other children at home to care for, was the sole care provider, had 
a low-income job that did not allow her much flexibility, and lived a significant 
distance from the hospital. For all of these reasons, her hospital visits for 
training were infrequent. She also had no resources for in-home nursing or behavioral 
assistance. For Ernie, some in-home nursing assistance was available, 
but the inconsistency of nurse availability, and the fact that Ernie’s father regularly 
traveled for his occupation, left Ernie’s mother with primary responsibility 
for PAP implementation. Her need to distress Ernie by requiring adherence with 
PAP was especially difficult and challenging for her because of his multiple, 
life-long health impairments. 

Finally, Trevor’s mother at first was resistant to the use of PAP or attending 
training sessions for its use, because of her past negative experience at another 
hospital. Her overall parenting skills were limited by difficulty setting limits 
or being consistent with any of her children. She also may have had cognitive 
difficulties that interfered with her learning of the behavioral protocol. 

The caregiver’s intent and resolve to enforce the regimen is critical. Caregivers 
who experience guilt or conflict over enforcing an intervention that causes 
short-term discomfort for important long-term health benefits will have difficulty 
obtaining PAP adherence with their child. This is a particularly important 
variable when children either are medically fragile or perceived to be by the 
caregiver. Parents may worry that a child with breathing or heart condition will 
be irreversibly harmed (have a stroke, hemorrhage, or heart attack) if stressed 
too much by a tantrum or physical prompting. Although such fears are usually 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 171 

unfounded, they nonetheless can prevent a parent from implementing behavioral 
interventions necessary to maintain adherence. If a caregiver does not comprehend 
or believe the seriousness of the child’s breathing problems, he or she 
will regard PAP as optional and may waver in commitment to replace the mask 
each and every time it is removed. Therefore, caregiver understanding of the 
risks of untreated breathing problems and the benefits of PAP is always important 
for regimen adherence. The behavioral intervention program used with the 
children in this study was designed to be as positive as possible. Using gradual 
exposure, counterconditioning, and positive reinforcement while having the 
caregiver observe the child’s increasing success and diminishing distress, helped 
the caregivers be more comfortable when they began implementing the PAP 
routine. 

In cases in which the caregiver is not fully committed or is unable to invest 
the time and energy required to assure adherence throughout the night, more 
modest intermediate goals might be set. Mask removal may be primarily motivated 
by escape from discomfort. Therefore, the caregiver should select an 
interval for PAP use that realistically can be enforced. For example, the caregiver 
may begin by implementing the behavioral procedures for only 30 min 
with emphasis on the rule that only the caregiver applies and removes the mask. 
If the child attempts to remove the mask the attempt will be blocked. If the 
mask is successfully removed, it will be replaced. If the child wears the mask, 
positive reinforcement is earned. Increasing the duration of enforcement should 
only occur when both caregiver and child have mastered the current duration. In 
this way, both experience success and a positive interaction rather than failure 
and conflict. Of course, if the child’s medical condition were so acutely tenuous 
that less than complete adherence during hours of sleep would be dangerous, 
then more invasive medical interventions would need to be considered. 

It should be noted that conducting a component analysis of the necessary and 
sufficient parts of the behavioral training was beyond the scope of this clinical 
investigation. Given the time it took for the training package here to be fully effective, 
it might be ethically justifiable to introduce the intervention components 
in varying combinations or sequences to conduct a component analysis. 

Conclusions that can be drawn from these results are limited by lack of home 
follow-up information for one child (Buzz), and follow-up data based on parent 
report and parent reading of the PAP time meter data (Ernie). These data may 
be overestimates of actual adherence. For example, if the parent records inaccurate 
information on the data sheets provided for tracking adherence, does not 
follow instructions for data collection, or is less than candid about the child’s 
degree of adherence, the data may not be valid. Time meter data can overestimate 
adherence because the meter runs if the machine is turned on, regardless 
of whether the mask is correctly positioned on the child’s face or is lying next 
to the child in the bed. Some models of PAP equipment can utilize a Smart Card 


172 SLIFER ET AL. 

(Respironics, Inc., Murrysville, PA; www.respironics.com) or similar electronic 
monitoring device, which may provide more accurate, objective adherence data. 
Future research is needed to conduct controlled clinical trials demonstrating the 
effects of systematic behavioral training for PAP on the adherence and pulmonary 
status of a larger group of children, including those in the preschool age 
range. Experimental group adherence should be compared to a usual care control 
group matched for age, developmental level, gender, and socioeconomic status. 
More clinical case examples of the type presented here also may help refine the 
behavioral training protocol, gradually determine its necessary components, and 
delineate its generality and limitations. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported, in part, by Grant HD 24061–16 (Kennedy Krieger 
Institute Mental Retardation Research Center) from the National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development. 

REFERENCES 

American Academy of Pediatrics. Section on Pediatric Pulmonary, Subcommittee on Obstructive 
Sleep Apnea Syndrome. (2002). Clinical practice guideline: Diagnosis and management of childhood 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics, 109, 704–712. 

American Thoracic Society. (1996). Standards and indications for cardiopulmonary sleep studies in 
children. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 153(2), 866–878. 

Blunden, S., Lushington, K., & Kennedy, D. (2001). Cognitive and behavioural performance in 
children with sleep-related obstructive breathing disorders. Sleep Med Review, 5(6), 447–461. 
Carroll, J. L. (2003). Obstructive sleep-disordered breathing in children: New controversies, new 

directions. Clinical Chest Medicine, 24(2), 261–282. 
Dahlquist, L. M. (1992). Coping with aversive medical treatments. In A. M. La Greca, L. J. Siegel, 

J. L. Wallander, & C. E. Walker (Eds.), Stress and coping in child health (pp. 345–376). New 
York: Guilford. 
Dahlquist, L. M., Gil, K. M., Kalfus, G. R., Blount, R. L., & Boyd, M. S. (1984). Enhancing an 
autistic girl’s cooperation with gynecological examinations. Clinical Pediatrics, 23(4), 203. 
DeRowe, A., Fishman, G., Leor, A., & Kornecki, A. (2003). Improving children’s cooperation 
with tracheostomy care by performing and caring for a tracheostomy in the child’s doll: A case 
analysis. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 67, 807–809. 

Derrickson, J. G., Neef, N. A., & Parrish, J. M. (1991). Teaching self-administration of suctioning 
to children with tracheostomies. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 24, 563–570. 
Gozal, D. (1998). Sleep-disordered breathing and school performance in children. Pediatrics, 102(3), 
616–620. 

Jeans, W. D., Fernando, D. C., Maw, A. R., & Leighton, B. C. (1981). A longitudinal study of the 
growth of the nasopharynx and its contents in normal children. British Journal of Radiology, 54, 
117–121. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 173 

Halbower, A. C., & Mahone, E. M. (2006). Neuropsychological morbidity linked to childhood 
sleep-disordered breathing. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 10, 97–107. 

Hawkins, N. E. (1991). Bravery training: An approach to desensitizing young children to fears 
encountered in the hospital setting. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 72(9), 
697–700. 

Hayes, S. C. (1981). Single-case research designs and empirical clinical practice. Journal of Consulting 
& Clinical Psychology, 49, 193–211. 

Koontz, K. L., Slifer, K. J., Cataldo, M. D., & Marcus, C. L. (2003). Improving pediatric compliance 
with positive airway pressure therapy: The impact of behavioral intervention. Sleep, 26, 
1–6. 

Lipton, A. J., & Gozal, D. (2003). Treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in children: Do we really 
know how? Sleep Medicine Review, 7(1), 61–80. 

Marcus, C. L., Rosen, G., Davidson-Ward, S. L., Halbower, A. C., Sterni, L., Lutz, J., et al. (2006). 
Efficacy and compliance with positive airway pressure therapy in children with obstructive sleep 
apnea. Pediatrics, 117, 442–451. 

Marcus, C. L., Ward, S. L., Mallory, G. B., Rosen, C. L., Beckerman, R. C., Weese-Mayer, D. E., 
et al. (1995). Use of nasal continuous positive airway pressure as treatment of childhood obstructive 
sleep apnea. Journal of Pediatrics, 127(1), 88–94. 

McComas, J. J., Lalli, J. S., & Benavides, C. (1999). Increasing accuracy and decreasing latency 
during clean intermittent self-catheterization procedures with young children. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 32, 217–220. 

Neef, N. A., Parrish, J. M., Hannigan, K. F., Page, T. J., & Iwata, B. A. (1989). Teaching self-
catheterization skills to children with neurogenic bladder complications. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 22, 237–243. 

Slifer, K. J. (1996). A video system to help children cooperate with motion control for radiation 
treatment without sedation. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 13, 91–97. 

Slifer, K. J., Babbitt, R. L., & Cataldo, M. D. (1995). Simulation and counterconditioning as an 
adjunct to pharmacotherapy for invasive pediatric procedures. Journal of Developmental and 
Behavioral Pediatrics, 16, 133–141. 

Slifer, K. J., Bucholtz, J., & Cataldo, M. D. (1994). Behavioral training of motion control in young 
children undergoing radiation treatment without sedation. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing, 
11, 55–63. 

Slifer, K. J., Cataldo, M. F., Cataldo, M. D., Llorente, A. M., & Gerson, A. C. (1993). Behavior 
analysis of motion control for pediatric during neuroimaging. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 26, 469–470. 

Slifer, K. J., Eischen, S. E., & Busby, S. (2002). Using counterconditioning to treat behavioral 
distress during subcutaneous injections in a pediatric rehabilitation patient. Brain Injury, 16, 
901–916. 

Slifer, K. J., Eischen, S. E., Tucker, C. L., Dahlquist, L. M., Busby, S., Sulc, W., et al. (2002). 
Behavioral treatment for child distress during repeated needle sticks. Behavioral and Cognitive 
Psychotherapy, 30, 57–68. 

Slifer, K. J., Koontz, K. L., & Cataldo, M. F. (2002). Operant contingency based preparation of 
children for functional magnetic resonance imaging . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 35, 
191–194. 

Slifer, K. J., Tucker, C. L., & Dahlquist, L. M. (2002). Helping children and caregivers cope with 
repeated invasive procedures: How are we doing? Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical 
Settings, 9, 131–152. 

Watson, P. J., & Workman, E. A. (1981). The non-current multiple-baseline across individuals 
design: An extension of the traditional multiple baseline design. Journal of Behavior Therapy 
and Experimental Psychiatry, 12, 257–259. 


174 SLIFER ET AL. 

APPENDIX A: GLOSSARY OF KEY BEHAVIORAL 
TERMS AND TECHNIQUES 


Positive Reinforcement 

Positive reinforcement occurs when a preferred item or activity is presented 
contingent on a target behavior, and that behavior subsequently increases in 
frequency or future probability. 

Negative Reinforcement 

Negative reinforcement occurs when an aversive or non-preferred item or activity 
is withdrawn contingent on a target behavior, and the target behavior increases 
in future probability. 

Differential Reinforcement 

Differential reinforcement refers to providing a reinforcer (e.g., preferred item 
or event) in response to those behaviors to be increased in frequency, but not in 
response to those one intends to decrease. 

Reinforcer Assessment 

A reinforcer assessment helps to establish effective consequences for strengthening 
behavior for any particular individual. Such an assessment may be accomplished 
by having the primary caregiver indicate the child’s preferences on 
a checklist of potentially reinforcing items and activities for the child’s developmental 
level. Generally speaking, preferred items or activities (those that the 
child will seek, select, and use) have the best potential as reinforcers. 

Task Analysis 

Task analysis refers to breaking a complex behavior or task into component steps, 
presenting them to the child one step at a time, and documenting how many 
of the steps the child can accomplish without formal behavioral intervention. 
The child’s specific behavioral response to each step is recorded to establish a 
pretreatment baseline. These data are subsequently recorded during each training 
session to document behavior change as a result of training or other intervention. 


BEHAVIORAL TRAINING FOR PAP 175 

Counterconditioning 

Counterconditioning is a technique used to modify anxiety (physiological arousal) 
that has become conditioned (reliably occurs in the presence of a specific stimulus 
or set of stimulus conditions) because of past association between the 
stimulus and aversive stimulation (e.g., pain, discomfort). For example children 
may cry, scream, and try to escape stimuli that they experience as painful or 
uncomfortable and anxiety inducing. During counterconditioning, the child’s 
conditioned anxiety is treated by carefully planned, graduated exposure to the 
feared or non-preferred stimulus while the child participates in a distracting, relaxing, 
or otherwise pleasurable activity. The activity must be one that produces 
an emotional state that is incompatible with anxiety (i.e., pleasure, relaxation). 
Once the child appears relaxed and to be enjoying the activity, gradual exposure 
is accomplished by slowly increasing the child’s proximity to the feared 
stimulus, and the duration of contact with the feared stimulus. 

Shaping 

Shaping refers to using differential reinforcement to teach and strengthen successive 
approximations of a target behavior or sequence of behaviors. Over time, the 
behavior exhibited by the individual becomes increasingly similar to the target 
behavior until the target behavior is mastered and can be directly reinforced. 

Escape Prevention 

During the procedure referred to as escape prevention (escape extinction), escape 
behavior in the presence of a feared or non-preferred stimulus is blocked or 
prevented using verbal prompting, redirection to a specific activity or task, and 
if necessary physically blocking of escape while gently guiding the child to 
remain in the situation. By blocking escape behavior, the therapist is able to 
weaken and extinguish behavior that is maintained by negative reinforcement. 


