The Laryngoscope

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Inc.
© 2004 The American Laryngological,
Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc. 

Complications of Microdebrider-Assisted 
Powered Intracapsular Tonsillectomy and 
Adenoidectomy 

Alexander Sorin, MD; John P. Bent, MD; Max M. April, MD; Robert F. Ward, MD 

Objectives: To study complications of powered intracapsular 
tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (PITA)
in pediatric patients with obstructive sleep apnea 
(OSA). Study Design: Retrospective chart review andlong-term follow-up in office or by telephone interview. 
Methods: We studied 278 patients who underwent 
PITA between September 2000 and October 
2002. Outcome measures were postoperative bleeding, 
velopharyngeal insufficiency, need for hospitalreadmission, tonsil regrowth, and return of snoringor sleep apnea symptoms. Results: All 278 children 
treated by PITA had immediate resolution of symptoms 
of OSA. Complications were noted in 11 patients(3.9%). Nine patients (3.2%) experienced tonsil regrowth 
with snoring, two of whom evolved to a returnof OSA that was definitively managed by means of acomplete tonsillectomy. Two patients (0.7%) had self-
limited bleeding. None of the patients developed 
persistent velopharyngeal insufficiency or required 
hospital readmission. Conclusions: Microdebriderassisted 
PITA is a safe and effective alternative for 
children otherwise treated with traditional tonsillectomy 
for symptoms of OSA due to adenotonsillarhypertrophy. This series suggests a 3.9% overall 
rate of complications, with the most common notedas tonsillar regrowth without recurrence of OSA.
Prospective trials with longer follow-up may definehigher complication rates. Key Words: Intracapsular 
tonsillectomy, tonsillotomy, subtotal tonsillectomy, 
complications of partial tonsillectomy, microdebrider, 
pediatric obstructive sleep apnea 

Laryngoscope, 114:297-300, 2004 

INTRODUCTION 

The history of tonsil surgery dates back to antiquity, 
with an early report describing blunt tonsillectomy with 
use of a finger technique attributed to Cornelius Celsus of 
Rome in the first century AD. 1 To this day, this procedure 
remains one of the most commonly performed surgeries 

From the New York Otolaryngology Institute, New York, New York, 

U.S.A. 
Editor's Note: This Manuscript was accepted for publication September 
5, 2003. 
Send Correspondence to John P. Bent, MD, New York Otolaryngology 
Institute, 186 East 76th Street, New York, NY 10021, U.S.A. E-mail: 
bent@I-2000.com 

throughout the world. Tonsillectomy is often indicated in 
the pediatric age group for treatment of recurrent tonsillitis 
resistant to medical management and oropharyngeal 
obstruction resulting in obstructive symptoms, including 
sleep apnea syndrome (OSA).2 Many publications have 
documented complications following tonsil surgery, such 
as postoperative bleeding, pain, or decreased oral intake.
3-6 Less common complications include postobstructive 
respiratory compromise, persistent pain, velopharyngeal 
insufficiency, psychological trauma, and even 
death.3-11 The literature describes a variety of tonsillectomy 
techniques that share the goal of increasing patient 
tolerance and minimizing complications. 

In recent literature, partial, or intracapsular, tonsillectomy 
has resurfaced as an alternative to complete tonsillectomy 
for the treatment of pediatric OSA. Partial tonsil 
removal was previously described with varying success 
via techniques such as guillotine, cryosurgery, and C0.2 
laser.12-15 Advantages ascribed to intracapsular tonsillectomy 
include less pain, earlier return to normal activity, 
earlier resumption of oral intake, and possibly decreased 
incidence of postoperative bleeding.14"17 

In 2002, Koltai et al.17 published their favorable experience 
spanning several years using a microdebrider to 
perform intracapsular tonsillectomy. This follows a longer 
experience using a microdebrider for adenoidectomy.18 

Since 2000, we have adopted microdebrider-assisted 
powered intracapsular tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy 
(PITA) as the procedure of choice for children with OSA 
due to tonsillar hypertrophy of noninfectious origin. This 
study will examine our complications after PITA. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

We retrospectively studied complications of microdebriderassisted 
PITA in children treated via this technique between 
September 1, 2000 and October 1, 2002. Exclusion criteria were a 
history of more than three episodes of tonsillitis per year, craniofacial 
dysmorphism, previous adenoidectomy, or bleeding disorder. 
Three hundred thirty-one children underwent PITA during 
this period, but 53 patients (16%) had a follow-up period of less 
than 4 weeks, leaving a cohort of 278 patients (84%) with adequate 
follow-up. To meet extended follow-up criteria, all patients 
were seen in the office or contacted by telephone interview at a 
minimum of 4 weeks and up to 1 year after the procedure. 

Laryngoscope 114: February 2004 Sorin et al.: Complications of Microdebrider-Assisted PITA 


Outcome measures were return of preoperative obstructive Tonsil regrowth was confirmed on physical examina


symptoms, snoring, tonsillar regrowth, immediate or delayed 
postoperative bleeding, velopharyngeal insufficiency, and need 
for hospital readmission. Data were collected by chart review and 
extended follow-up in the office or by telephone interview. 

All patients underwent PITA performed by or under the 
direct supervision of three attending surgeons (JPB, MMA, or RFW). 
To start the procedure, the patient was placed in a standard Rose 
position. An adenoidectomy was performed under direct visualization 
with use of a mirror and microdebrider. Once the adenoid 
was removed, hemostasis was attained with suction-cautery. A 
Hurd retractor was then used to medialize the tonsil while protecting 
the adjacent mucosa of the tonsillar pillars and the tongue 
base. Tonsils were shaved to 1+ concave shape, with care taken 
to avoid penetrating the tonsillar capsule. Hemostasis was 
achieved by applying suction electrocautery to the cut tonsillar 
surfaces. All patients received a single intraoperative intravenous 
dose of dexamethasone and antibiotics, as well as 7 days of 
postoperative amoxicillin or the equivalent in penicillin allergic 
patients. All patients were seen approximately 4 weeks after 
surgery. 

RESULTS 

Of the 278 patients eligible for this evaluation, 164 
were male and 114 female. The average age of all subjects 
was 4.7 years (SD = 21 mo), with ages ranging from 17 
months to 14.4 years. After PITA, all patients had rapid 
resolution of symptoms of obstruction without persistent 
velopharyngeal insufficiency. Twelve of the subjects were 
planned inpatients: 10 were admitted for precautionary 
reasons because they were the first group of children 
younger than 3 years of age who were treated by this 
procedure, one was a patient with Down syndrome, and 
one with cerebral palsy and mental retardation was admitted 
for observation following anesthesia for seizure 
disorder. 

Table I details the 11 patients who developed complications 
and returned for evaluation and management. 
Self-limited bleeding was encountered in two patients, one 
of whom developed delayed bleeding on the fifth postoperative 
day that resolved following removal of a blood clot 
in the office. 

tion in nine patients, all of whom had a return of snoring 
symptoms. Of the seven patients with tonsillar regrowth, 
two evolved to a recurrence of OSA that was treated by 
completion tonsillectomy. Of the two patients requiring 
tonsillectomy, one was also diagnosed with the first episode 
of streptococcal-positive tonsillitis several months 
after undergoing PITA for noninfectious adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy with OSA. Both patients who underwent 
completion tonsillectomy experienced uneventful and successful 
postoperative recoveries. 

DISCUSSION 

The popularity of tonsillectomy for treatment of pediatric 
recurrent tonsillitis and tonsillar hypertrophy supports 
the role of this procedure in appropriately selected 
patients.2 The most common complications after tonsillectomy 
are prolonged pain with or without decreased oral 
intake and acute or delayed bleeding.3"8 Although exceptionally 
rare, death following tonsillectomy has also been 
reported.7-8 The morbidities rates vary, with transient 
pain of varying magnitude reported in almost all subjects 
and postoperative bleeding encountered in 0.2 to 4% of all 
procedures.3"6 In light of the adverse impact of OSA and 
recurrent acute tonsillitis on quality of life, this relatively 
low complication rate is viewed as acceptable.19'20 

Traditional techniques for tonsillectomy are well described 
and involve removal of the entire tonsil by means 
of extracapsular dissection with use of a cold knife, snare, 
electrocautery, plasma coagulation, harmonic scalpel, or 
other surgical instruments.1,12,13,21,22 Despite the efficacy 
of these techniques, innovative surgeons continue to devise 
new alternatives to minimize complications. 

Pediatric OSA is caused by anatomic obstruction of 
the upper airway that classically resolves by removal of 
hypertrophied adenotonsillar tissue. The etiology of adenotonsillar 
hypertrophy resulting in OSA is multifactorial, 
but it is not considered to be a direct consequence of 
an active infectious process. As such, the need for complete 
tonsillectomy in this setting inspires debate. 

TABLE I. 
Complications Following Powered Intracapsular Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy. 


Patient Age 
(N = 278) Sex (months) Complication Treatment 
1 Male 27 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
2 Male 32 Tonsil regrowth, snore, rOSA Tonsillectomy 
3 Male 40 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
4 Female 42 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
5 Female 44 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
6 Female 54 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
7 Male 55 Immediate self-limit bleed Observe 
8 Female 58 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
9 Female 60 Tonsil regrowth, snore Observe 
10 Female 60 Delayed bleed POD#5 Removed clot 
11 Male 79 Tonsil regrowth, snore, rOSA, Strep. Tonsillectomy 

rOSA; return of obstructive sleep apnea; snore, return of snoring without OSA; Strep., Sfreptococcus-positive pharyngitis; POD#5; post-operative day 5. 

Laryngoscope 114: February 2004 Sorin et al.: Complications of Microdebrider-Assisted PITA 


Intracapsular tonsillectomy for the treatment of OSA 
is an alternative that has received significant attention in 
recent literature. Intracapsular tonsillectomy was initially 
described in the early 19th century with the use of a 
guillotine12 and more recently reported in the 1970s by 
means of cryosurgery.13 These techniques fell out of favor, 
however, because of concerns regarding tonsil regrowth 
and the inherently crude nature of cryosurgery resulting 
in unpredictable and often excessive scarring, respectively. 
Improved technology in the form of the microdebrider 
allows for precise removal not previously possible 
with more antiquated techniques. 

The markedly diminished pain and bleeding after 
intracapsular tonsillectomy results from preservation of 
the tonsillar capsule as a protective sheath covering 
the deeper neurovascular structures.17,23,24 Utilizing 
microdebrider-assisted PITA, Koltai et al.17 confirmed the 
predicted benefits of decreased pain, less analgesic use, 
quicker return to normal activity, fewer patients requiring 
hospital readmission, no instances of immediate bleeding, 
and fewer patients with delayed bleeding when compared 
with traditional tonsillectomy technique. Other recently 
described techniques for intracapsular tonsillectomy, including 
CO2 laser assisted14"16 and ionized field ablation 
(coblation) assisted intracapsular tonsillectomy23, 24 compare 
favorably to formal tonsillectomy, thereby supporting 
the benefit of capsule preservation. 

Our series of 278 patients treated for pediatric OSA 
via microdebrider-assisted PITA is the largest report in 
the English literature describing complications following 
partial tonsil removal for symptoms of non-infectionrelated 
tonsil hypertrophy. All patients had immediate 
resolution of symptoms of tonsillar obstruction without 
evidence of persistent velopharyngeal insufficiency or 
need for hospital readmission. Self-limited bleeding was 
confirmed in two patients (0.7%), while tonsil regrowth 
with snoring occurred in nine (3.2%). Of the nine patients, 
only two evolved to a recurrence of OSA requiring a completion 
tonsillectomy, one of whom was also diagnosed 
with a first episode of streptococcal-positive tonsillitis several 
months after PITA without a prior history of tonsil 
infections. Therefore, in this patient, tonsil regrowth occurred 
in the setting of acute tonsillitis, which may have 
confounded the etiology of recurrence. Both patients 
treated with a completion procedure had immediate resolution 
of OSA and experienced uneventful and successful 
postoperative recoveries. 

This study, by virtue of its retrospective design, contains 
limitations. Dissatisfied parents may be less likely to 
follow-up or return phone calls. Parents contacted many 
months after surgery may have faulty recollection of their 
child's experience. As in previous studies, the impact of 
intracapsular tonsillectomy on the incidence of bleeding 
suggests improved outcome (0.7%); however, larger 
studies are required to reveal a statistically significant 
difference given the low overall incidence of this important 
complication. In addition, more extended follow-up 
may reveal long-term complications we have not yet 
encountered. 

We are aware that a percentage of PITA patients will 
experience symptomatic rehypertrophy. Very young chil-

Laryngoscope 114: February 2004 

dren, whose tonsillar tissue has not yet reached maximal 
size, are probably at greater risk. Our experience documents 
a small incidence of tonsil regrowth with associated 
snoring, and a smaller but more worrisome incidence of 
regrowth evolving to a recurrence of OSA requiring a 
revision procedure. What proportion of children with tonsillar 
regrowth develop a recurrence of OSA is one of the 
many questions that we are currently studying as part of 
a multi-institutional effort to determine the role of intracapsular 
tonsillectomy in the treatment of pediatric OSA. 

CONCLUSION 

Powered intracapsular tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy 
is a safe and effective alternative for children otherwise 
treated with traditional tonsillectomy for symptomatic 
adenotonsillar hypertrophy. Our preliminary 
experience confirms a low incidence of bleeding (0.7%) and 
no instances of persistent velopharyngeal insufficiency or 
need for hospital readmission. The most common complication 
noted in this study was tonsillar regrowth with 
snoring, with only two patients evolving to a recurrence of 
OSA requiring revision surgery. Prospective long-term trials 
will determine the complications and efficacy of 
microdebrider-assisted PITA in the treatment of pediatric 
OSA. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Younis RT, Lazar RD. History and current practice of tonsillectomy. 
Laryngoscope 2002; 112:3-5. 
2. 
Deutsch ES. Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy: changing indications. 
Pediatr Clin North Am 1996;43:1319-1338. 
3. 
Crysdale WS, Russel D. Complications of tonsillectomy and 
adenoidectomy in 9404 children observed overnight. CMAJ 
Can MedAssoc J 1986;135:1139-1142. 
4. 
Postma DS, Folsom F. The case for an outpatient "approach" 
for all pediatric tonsillectomies and/or adenotonsillectomies: 
a 4-year review of 1419 cases as a community hospital. 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;127:101-108. 
5. 
Richmond KH, Wetmore RF, Baranak CC. Postoperative complications 
following tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy: who is 
at risk? Int J Pediatr Otorhinolayngol 1987;13:117-124. 
6. 
Tami TA, Parker GS, Taylor RE. Post-tonsillectomy bleeding: 
an evaluation of risk factors. Laryngoscope 1987;97: 
1307-1311. 
7. 
Windfuhr JP, Chen YS. Hemorrhage following pediatric tonsillectomy 
before puberty. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 
2001;58:197-204. 
8. 
Peeters A, Claes J, Saldien V. Lethal complications after 
tonsillectomy. Acta Oto-Rhino-Laryngol Belg 2001;55: 
207-213: 
9. 
Gerber ME, O'Connor DM, Adler E, et al. Selected risk factors 
in pediatric adenotonsillectomy. Arch Otolaryngol Head 
Neck Surg 1996;122:811-814. 
10. 
Fernandes DB, Grobbelaar AO, Hudson DA, et al. Velopharyngeal 
incompetence after adenotonsillectomy in non-cleft 
patients. Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 1996;34364-367. 
11. 
Randall DA, Hoffer ME. Complications of tonsillectomy and 
adenoidectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1998;118: 
61-68. 
12. 
Unlu Y, Tekalan SA, Cemilogu R, et al. Guillotine dissection 
tonsillectomy in children. J Laryngol Oto 1992; 106: 
817-820. 
13. 
Principato JJ. Cryosurgical treatment of the lymphoid tissue 
of Waldeyer's ring. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 1987;20: 
365-370. 
14. 
Hultcrantz E, Linder A, Markstrom A. Tonsillectomy or tonsillotomy? 
A Randomized study comparing postoperative 
Sorin et al.: Complications of Microdebrider-Assisted PITA 


pain and long-term effects. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 
1999;51:171-176. 

15. 
Linder A, Markstrom A, Hultcrantz E. Using carbon dioxide 
laser for tonsillotomy in children. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 
1999;50:31-36. 
16. 
Densert O, Desai H, Eliasson A, et al. Tonsillotomy in children 
with tonsillar hypertrophy. Acta Otolaryngol 2001; 
121:854-858. 
17. 
Koltai PJ, Solares CA, Mascha EJ, et al. Intracapsular partial 
tonsillectomy for tonsillar hypertr ophy in children. 
Laryngoscope 2002;112:17-19. 
18. 
Koltai PJ, Chan J, Younes A. Power-assisted adenoidectomy: 
total and partial resection. Laryngoscope 2002;112:29-31. 
19. 
Goldstein NA, Post JC, Rosenfeld RM, et al. Impact of tonsillectomy 
and adenoidectomy on child behavior. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2000;126:494-498. 
20. 
DeSerres LM, Derkay C, Sie K, et al. Impact of adenotonsillectomy 
on quality of life in children with obstructive sleep 
disorders. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002; 128: 
486-496. 
21. 
Shah UK, Galinkin J, Chiavacci R, et al. Tonsillectomy by 
means of plasma-mediated ablation. Arch Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2002;128:672-676. 
22. 
Willging JP, Wiatiak BJ. Harmonic scalpel tonsillectomy in 
children: a randomized prospective study. Otolaryngol 
Head Neck Surg 2003;128:318-325. 
23. 
Lee KC, Altenua MM, Barnes DR, et al. Incidence of 
complications for subtotal ionized field ablation of 
the tonsil. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;127: 
531-538. 
24. 
Temple RH, Timms MS. Pediatric coblation tonsillectomy. Int 
J Pediatr Otorhinolayngol 2001;61:195-198. 
Laryngoscope 114: February 2004 
Sorin et al.: Complications of Microdebrider-Assisted PITA 


