International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology (2003) 67, 359 . 
364 


www.elsevier.com/locate/ijporl 

Adenotonsillectomy in the morbidly obese child 

Andrew Spectora, Sara Scheida, Sandra Hassinkb, Ellen S. Deutschc, 
James S. Reillyc, Steven P. Cookc,* 

a Department of Otolaryngology, Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, 111 S. 11th Street, Philadelphia, 
PA 19134, USA 
b Department of Pediatrics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, P.O. Box 269, Wilmington, DE 19899, 
USA 
c Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, P.O. Box 269, Wilmington, DE 
19899, USA 

Received 26 February 2002; received in revised form 1 November 2002; accepted 23 November 2002 

KEYWORDS 

Adenotonsillectomy; 
Body mass index; 
Obstructive sleep apnea 

Summary Objective: The prevalence of obesity in the pediatric population has risen 
more than 20% in 25 years. Accordingly, surgical procedures on obese children have 
become more common. Adenotonsillectomy (AT) remains among the most frequently 
performed pediatric surgical procedures in the United States. Our objective was to 
determine if there is an increased complication rate in morbidly obese (MO) children 
undergoing AT and if elective pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) admission for 
observation is warranted. Methods: This retrospective study includes postoperative 
admissions to the PICU over a 4-year period at one hospital. Out of 957 
adenotonsillectomies performed by one surgeon, 543 were admitted to the hospital. 
Fourteen MO children were identified. Using body mass index (BMI; weight in kg/m2), 
as calculated for age appropriate categories, postoperative outcomes of AT in MO 
children (. 
95th percentile BMI) were determined. These 14 were electively 
admitted to the PICU for airway observation. The indication for surgery in these 14 
children was obstructive sleep apnea. Ages ranged from 4 to 15 years. There were 11 
males and 3 females. Results: Two patients required overnight bi-level positive 
airway pressure (BiPAP) for oxygen desaturation. One patient remained intubated for 
10 days. Three patients required supplemental oxygen. Four of these admissions had 
preoperative polysomnograms (PSGs). Conclusions: Our study concluded that routine 
PICU admission was not warranted for most MO patients although several required 
supplemental oxygen, BiPAP, and one required intubation. These interventions can 
easily be administered in a surgical floor bed. In fact, these results imply that 
performing this surgical procedure in obese children is not as risky as many believe. 
Trends were noted for an increased need of airway interventions in children requiring 
preoperative BiPAP and in those with comorbidities. In this small population, sample 
AT was performed on the basis of history. This is to serve as a pilot review for a 
prospective study in which preoperative PSGs would be used to determine potential 
indicators for elective PICU admission. 

– 
2003 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. 
*Corresponding author. Tel.: /1-302-651-5829; fax: /1-302-651-5328. 
E-mail address: scook@nemours.org (S.P. Cook). 


0165-5876/03/$ -see front matter – 
2003 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. 
doi:10.1016/S0165-5876(02)00401-9 


A. Spector et al. 
1. Introduction 
Adenotonsillar hypertrophy can cause airway 
obstruction in children. Adenotonsillar hypertrophy 
is the primary cause of sleep apnea in children and 
has become an increasingly more common indication 
for this procedure. Adenotonsillectomy (AT) is 
performed more than 300,000 times per year. With 
the elevated proportions of obese children in the 
population, it can be presumed that more obese 
children will undergo surgical procedures including 
AT. Although most children with obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA) are not obese, obesity does contribute 
to obstructed breathing [1]. Kudoh and Sanai [2] 
noted that severely obese children with large 
tonsils and adenoids tend to have more apnea 
compared with those without comorbidities because 
both conditions can cause OSA. It is unknown 
whether the need for postoperative monitoring is 
increased in obese children or if elective admission 
to a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) is warranted. 
The purpose of this pilot study was to 
determine whether morbidly obese (MO) children 
are at risk for the need of postoperative airway 
interventions and, therefore, require elective PICU 
monitoring. 

2. Methods and materials 
This study was designed as a retrospective chart 
review of MO children admitted to the PICU after 
AT from January 1997 to July 2001. The patients of 
one surgeon at the Alfred I. duPont Hospital for 
Children, a tertiary-care pediatric hospital in 
Wilmington, DE, were used for the study. A total 
of 957 children underwent AT during the 3-year 
period for which charts were reviewed. Charts of 
38 patients who went to the PICU postoperatively 
after AT were reviewed to determine if the patient 
was MO based upon body mass index (BMI) scores 
greater than the 95th percentile for age. MO is the 
clinical term we used to describe those children 
who fall into this category. One surgeon electively 
admitted all patients subjectively considered to be 
MO to the PICU. 

Several parameters were analyzed for the 14 MO 
patients. Airway interventions in the PICU were 
noted including the use of supplemental oxygen, 
bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP), intubation, 
and placement of a nasopharyngeal airway. 
Additional complications, such as postoperative 
bleeding and patient comorbidities were also 
documented. When available, the results of preoperative 
polysomnograms (PSGs) were reviewed. 

3. Results 
Between January 1997 and July 2001, 957 children 
underwent AT. Of the patients, 543 were 
admitted to stay overnight in the hospital. Thirty-
eight patients went to the PICU postoperatively. 
Fourteen of these children were MO, and all but 
one was admitted to the PICU electively. All ATs 
were performed for airway obstruction. There 
were 11 males and 3 females. The ages ranged 
from 4 to 15 years (average: 10.8 years). All the MO 
children ranged above the 95th percentile for BMI. 
Eleven children stayed in the PICU only one night 
and did not require airway intervention. All 11 
were discharged from the hospital the next day. 
Two additional patients went home from the PICU 
the first postoperative day despite receiving some 
intervention other than simple observation. The 
average length of stay in the PICU was 1.7 days. 
The longest stay in the PICU was 12 days. 

In the chart review, it was noted that all children 
were placed on at least oxygen by nasal canula 
upon completion of their AT. The duration of this 
intervention was not well documented in the 
patients’ charts unless the children required oxygen 
for desaturations. Generally, oxygen by nasal 
canula was not continued beyond the first hour or 
two postoperatively. 

Table 1 is a list of all obese patients admitted to 
the PICU after AT and demonstrates patient demographics 
including age, sex, height/weight, BMI, 
comorbidities, preoperative oxygen requirements, 
additional procedures performed, postoperative 
complications and interventions, length of PICU 
admission, and oxygen requirements upon discharge. 
One of the three children with comorbidities 
had oxygen requirements as compared with 1 
of 11 children without comorbidities who desaturated. 
The following interventions were used: one 
patient was intubated and two patients received 
BiPAP. 

Table 2 lists the results of preoperative PSGs on 
the four children who had them and the airway 
complications each experienced. 

Two children required BiPAP in the immediate 
postoperative period. Neither of these children had 
been on home BiPAP prior to surgery. Both children 
received BiPAP in the PICU for desaturations, while 
awake postoperatively. Both eventually were able 
to maintain their oxygen saturation at normal 
levels before discharge the next day. Only one of 
these children had a sleep study which demonstrated 
92 apneic or hypopneic events though his 
AHI was just 3.7. 

Only one child, who had Prader-Willi syndrome, 
required intubation postoperatively. He remained 


Table 1 Patient demographics 

Number Age Sex Height BMI Comorbidity Preop. Complica-Additional Intervention Days in PICU Oxygen at 
(cm)/ oxygen tions procedures discharge 
weight (kg) 
1 15 M 174.5/119.8 39.34 1 
2 15 M 177/141 45 1 
3 9 M 127/42.5 26.1 Desaturation BiPAP 1 No 
4 11 M 147.3/54.8 25.26 Achondroplasia 1 
5 9 M 146.6/86.2 38.3 Desaturation BiPAP 1 No 
6 6 M 124.7/46.7 29.8 Nasal cautery 1 
7 5 F 114/42.5 32.7 1 
8 13 M 164.5/140 51.66 1 
9 15 M 168/101.4 35.1 1 
10 15 M 170.3/128.1 44.3 1 
11 12 F 159.5/82 32.0 Bleeding on 15th 1 
postoperative day*/ 
cautery/right myringotomy 
with tube 
12 11 M 117/52.8 38.1 RAD, Prader-Willi Nasal Resp. failure, Intubation 12 12 Yes; no longcanula 
pneumonia days er requires 
13 12 M 170/131.6 45.53 1 
14 4 F 99/20.2 20.2 Beckwith/Weide-Direct laryngoscopy/ 1 
mann, tracheomabronchoscopy 
lacia 

BMI, body mass index; PICU, pediatric intensive care unit; M, male; F, female; RAD, reactive airway disease; HTN, hypertension; BiPAP, bi-level positive airway 
pressure; BMT, bilateral myringotomy with tubes; URI, upper respiratory tract infection; NP, nasopharyngeal. 

Adenotonsillectomy in the morbidly obese child 


A. Spector et al. 
Table 2 Sleep studies 

Patient number AHI pO2 (%) pCO2 Events Complication Intervention 
1 20 70 / / / / 
5 3.7 / 92 Oxygen desaturation BiPAP 
7 8 B/90 / 68 / / 
8 56.7 B/72 / / / / 

AHI, apnea to hypopnea index; BiPAP, bi-level positive airway pressure; NP, nasopharyngeal. 

intubated for 10 days. Before surgery, he had 
required supplemental oxygen via nasal canula for 
frequent oxygen desaturations. While awake, he 
was noted to have significantly elevated pCO2 
though he never underwent a formal preoperative 
PSG. He was also noted to desaturate to 77% while 
asleep at home. He underwent AT on an urgent 
basis. His hospitalization was complicated by 
pneumonia and respiratory failure. He was treated 
with intravenous antibiotics and steroids before 
successful extubation after two failed attempts. 
This child ultimately required no oxygen at home. 

Another child returned to the operating room on 
the fifteenth postoperative day for cautery of a 
bleed from the tonsillar fossa. 

A 4-year old female with Beckwith. 
Weidemann 
syndrome and a history of tracheomalacia necessitating 
a tracheostomy. She had already been 
decanulated at the time of surgery. She had an 
uncomplicated postoperative course and went 
home the following day. 

The child with the preoperative PSG most indicative 
of severe obstruction was also the child 
with the highest BMI (51.66). He went home on the 
first postoperative day without incident. 

4. Discussion 
The prevalence of obesity in children (ages 6. 
11) in the United States from 1988 to 1994 was 14%, 
and the percentage of obese adolescents (ages 12. 
17) in that same time period was 11% [3]. These 
represent 6% increases from 1976 to 1980. The 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 
(NHANES) from 1963 to 1965, 1966 to 1970, 1971 to 
1974, 1976 to 1980, and 1988 to 1991 examined the 
prevalence and trends of overweight children and 
adolescents. According to this survey, and based on 
BMIs (weight in kg/m2) greater than the 85th 
percentile of age-adjusted categories, the prevalence 
of overweight children and adolescents was 
22% [4]. This is an increase of 40% from 1976 to 
1990 in ages between 6 and 17.3. Of the same age 

ranges, 10.9% were obese based on estimates for 
the 95th percentile of BMI [4]. There is no 
universally accepted definition of obesity in the 
pediatric population. BMI, while the most commonly 
used measurement of obesity, is not perfect 
because it is not truly a measure of ‘‘fatness’’ and 
adiposity since children have not reached their 
peak heights and have different degrees of maturity 
[4]. In addition, the BMI changes drastically as 
children grow to attain their adult height and 
weight unlike in adults [4]. 

Obese children are predisposed to upper airway 
obstruction and OSA. In addition, children with OSA 
may have associated complications with surgery 
such as respiratory and cardiovascular complications, 
prolonged hospital stay, and death [1,5]. 
Symptoms of these morbidities and subsequent 
findings on PSG may correlate with the degree of 
obesity [1]. It is, therefore, possible that PSG 
results may be predictive in determining which 
obese children would benefit from more intensive 
postoperative monitoring though this study did not 
demonstrate such a need. 

Airway obstruction from adenotonsillar hypertrophy 
can result in chronic alveolar hypoventilation, 
hypercapnia, and hypoxia ultimately leading 
to cardiac and pulmonary morbidity. Some children 
may not require preoperative sleep studies if they 
demonstrate loud snoring, observed apneic events, 
and prominent adenotonsillar tissue. A PSG is, 
however, helpful in revealing airway obstruction 
that would warrant AT if clinical evidence of 
obstruction is not obvious based on history and 
physical examination or when anatomy, but not 
history, is indicative of obstruction. Because obese 
children are considered medically complicated 
surgical candidates, it is important to demonstrate 
that there is significant airway obstruction and that 
surgery will correct this problem [6]. 

AT results in a sudden reduction of upper airway 
obstruction that may necessitate postoperative 
monitoring, perhaps in an intensive care setting. 
Postoperative monitoring is indicated after surgery 
in those children with significant medical comor



Adenotonsillectomy in the morbidly obese child 

bidities including central nervous system dysfunction, 
severe OSA, age less than 3, and craniofacial 
anomalies [2]. Postoperative morbidity was more 
frequently observed in patients with severe preoperative 
obstructive symptoms such as daytime 
somnolence, retractions, choking, cyanosis, frequent 
waking, and urgent performance of surgery 
[7]. 

5. Conclusion 
Our study was too small to determine any 
statistically significant predictors that would indicate 
if MO children are at higher risk for postoperative 
complications. This limited review 
suggests that the MO children reported here did 
well enough to be discharged the first postoperative 
day. There is a known increase in postoperative 
morbidity in children with OSA. Perhaps morbid 
obesity alone does not increase risk of surgery and 
AT should be performed without additional concern 
given potential complications of not relieving 
upper airway obstruction. It would seem reasonable 
for MO children to be admitted to the hospital 
though not the PICU for observation after surgery. 
The results of this study imply, however, that MO 
children do well after AT despite the perceived, 
and possibly incorrect, increased risk of surgery. 
Within this cohort, only 1 of 14 MO children 
required attention in the PICU after AT. Most 
interventions for respiratory problems encountered 
in the group of children reported here could be 
managed on a standard hospital unit. This includes 
treatments such as oxygen by nasal canula, face-
mask, or BiPAP. It is also important in an effort to 
conserve PICU resources in the face of expensive 
medical care and nursing shortages. 

Though not included in this study several patients 
of other surgeons were noted to require 
BiPAP in the postoperative period if it was required 
before surgery. In several instances, though, BiPAP 
was continued preemptively and not because of 
clinical need for intervention. When examining the 
patients of other surgeons not included in this 
study, there was a higher incidence of respiratory 
complications postoperatively in patients with 
comorbid conditions. Even these children may be 
monitored on the floor unless a complication 
occurs. One patient with a major complication 
requiring intubation in our study did have a history 
of reactive airway disease and Prader-Willi syndrome. 


Further study is needed to determine more 
specifically which children are likely to require 
additional treatment. One area warranting further 

research is the utility of the PSG. In this review, we 
found no consistent criteria as to who received 
preoperative PSGs. Lack of consistency in obtaining 
preoperative PSGs also made it difficult to show 
which features of the study might predict the need 
for PICU admission after AT. It would be helpful to 
document preoperative indications for the AT with 
the PSG. A postoperative PSG should be considered 
to demonstrate resolution of apnea and whether 
this relief was sustained over a long-term period. 
This is particularly important since sustained 
weight loss over an extended period is often an 
elusive goal. 

Based on history and physical examination alone, 
all the children needed AT though the ability to 
predict complications was limited. This small 
cohort is, therefore, a pilot review. Preparations 
are being made for a prospective study utilizing 
pre-and postoperative PSGs in order to better 
stratify risks for postoperative complications. This 
becomes more important because there was seemingly 
no correlation between increasing BMI and 
need for intervention. 

One weakness of this study is its retrospective 
nature. One surgeon electively admitted MO patients 
to the PICU after surgery. This was performed 
subjectively and not on the basis of BMI and 
ultimately appears to be unnecessary. It is possible 
that there were some MO children who were not 
identified by this review and did well after surgery 
without PICU admission. Also, 24 other post-AT 
children were admitted to the PICU, none of which 
were MO suggesting that obesity is not the risk 
factor for complications that it seemed. It may be 
helpful to compare the reasons for these admissions 
with those of the MO children. In addition, 
examination of comorbidities and preoperative 
PSGs in the non-obese children may help to reveal 
parameters warranting PICU admission. 

References 

[1] C.M. Bower, A. 
Gungor, Pediatric obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome, Otolaryngol. Clin. North Am. 33 (2000) 49. 
75. 
[2] F. Kudoh, A. Sanai, Effect of tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy 
on obese children with sleep-associated breathing 
disorders, Acta Otolaryngol. Suppl. 523 (1996) 216 . 
218. 
[3] National 
Center for Health Statistics, FASTATS A to Z: 
Overweight Prevalence (online), Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Hyattsville, MD. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
fastats/overwt.htm. 
[4] R.P. Troiano, K.M. Flegal, R.J. Kuczmarski, S.M. Campbell, 
C.L. Johnson, Overweight prevalence and trends for children 
and adolescents. The National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Surveys, 1963 to 1991, Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. Med. 
149 (1963) 1085. 
1091. 

A. Spector et al. 
[5] H. Reuveni, T. Simon, T. Asher, E. Asher, Tarasiuk, Health pediatric patient documented by polysomnography, Int. J. 
care services utilization in children with obstructive sleep Pediatr. Otorhinolaryngol. 41 (1997) 133. 
143. 
apnea syndrome, Pediatrics 110 (2002) 68. 
72. [7] S.D. Price, D.B. Hawkins, E.J. Kahlstrom, Tonsil and adenoid 
[6] G.J. 
Wiet, C. Bower, R. Seibert, M. Griebel, Surgical surgery for airway obstruction: perioperative respiratory 
correction of obstructive sleep apnea in the complicated morbidity, Ear Nose Throat J. 72 (1993) 526. 
531. 

